THE

Parliamentary Register;

OR,

HISTORY

OF THE

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES

OF THE

HOUSE OF LORDSj

CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF

The most interesting Speeches and Motions; accurate Copies of the moll remarkable Letters and Papers; of the most material Evidence, Petitions, &c. laid before and offered to the House,

DURING THfc

First Session of the Fifteenth Parliament

OF

GREAT B R I TAIN, -

Y O L. IY.

LONDON : printed for J. Debrett, ( Successor to Mr. Almon ) opposite % Burlington - House, Piccadilly.

^ IDCCLXjXXII.

C O N T

Q F

FOURTH

DEBATE on the Earl of Westmoreland’s Motion for an Address to his Majesty at the opening of the Session i

Motion for an Address to the Queen. 7

The Lords9 Address ibid, H is Majestys ’ Answer 9 Debate and Proceedings on several Motions respecting the Duke of Grafton and Lord Pomfret 20

.. .. ... on the Duke of Bolton’s Motion relative to the Capture of the East and West India Fleets. 21 Proceedings respe£ling the _ Earl of Pomfret 31

Copies of Instructions from the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty ’ to Capt. Moutray - 32

Extract of a Letter from Admiral Geary to Mr. Stephens ‘ 34

Copy of a Letter from Capt.

Moutray to the fame 3 ? Debate on the fame 36 Lord’s Protest against the Motion for an Address in

E NTS

THE

V O L U M E.

consequence of the King’s ' Melfage 125

Second Protest 128

Counfel’s Argument on an

D V

Appeal from a Decree of the Lord Chancellor, respecting the Marriage of Lord William Gordon 130 Debate on the fame 134 - - - on the Duke of Bolton’s Motion, in Consequence of certain ’ ' Papers ( moved for previous to the Recefs ) relative to the Cap - ture of the East and West - India fleets 135

- - - - - on the second reading

of Gooche’s Divorce - bill 148

- - - - - — on the Earl of Radnor’s Motion for obliging all Officers in the Militia to deliver their qualifications to the Clerks of the Peace of each County 164

- - - - - on the Earl Ferrers *

Eftimation of the increase of Roman Catholics 169

- - - - - on the third reading

of the Loan - bill 173

The

CONTENTS.

The Protefi against the Loan - bill - - 180

- - - - - Oh the Increase of Ro -

man Catholics 183

— - - on the iecond read -

ing of the Bill to enable. Justices of the Peace to act without a Dedimus po - teflatem 185 '

: - - - on the third reading

bf the ’ Militia - bill 196

— - - - on the Jlmington Inclosure - bill 19 5

- - - - - on the Petition of

James By water ordered for Execution by the Court of Justiciary of Scotland for a Highway Robbery

258

~ - - - —on the Preteniiions of

several noble Claimants to the Office of Lord Great. Chamberlain of England, t with the lubftance of the Pleadings of the relpc&ive Connfel 264

- - - — on the Foul Salt - bill

298

- - - - - on the Bill for pre -

venting the - Profanation of the Sabbath - day 298

^ on the Report of the Committee of the - Kington { W orceftcdhire ) Inck > sure - hill 312

— - - - on the Petition of the

American Priionerg in

Mill - prison 319

on the - Almanac Duty - bill 321

— - - - on the Jfle of Man -

bill 336

— - —— ^ on the Bill for preventing clandestine Marriages 342

— - - - on the Isle of Man - i -

’ bill : ' 348

——on the Coventry Election - bill 351

— - - - on the {Bill for grant -

ing Dr Smith a Compensation for viliting the Prisons. 355

- - - - - on the Bill for granting Mr Philips a. gratuity for his Discovery of a Pow - r der for destroying "Weevils and other Vermin 358

- - - - - r on the Petition of the

American Prisonefs pre - ^ fented by the Duke of Richmond 371

- —on Philips’s Powder - bill 378.

- - - - - on the Iecond reading

of the Bill for indemnifying the Governor and Council of Bengal 387 — " on Philips’s Powder -

bill 392

Debate on the second reading of the Marriage - bill 40a Debate on the Insolvent

. Dsbtors - bill 405

THE

H I S T O R Y

OF THE

Proceedings and Debates

Of the FIRST SESSION of the

HOUSE of L O R D S,

OF THE

Fifteenth Parliament of Great - Britain.

ON the ift of November, 1780, the King went to the House of Lords, and opened this fession with a speech from the throne, which the reader will find in the Commons Debates ' of this session, page 25.

As soon as the King was gone, the Earl of PFeJlmore - land moved, - that an humble address be presented to his Majesty. The propriety of this addre/s his Lordship supported in the following manner. The safe delivery of the Queen, and the birth of another Prince, events which increased the happinefs of the Royal Family, and also its {lability, could not but be pleafing, to every Member of that House, and subjects of joyful congratulation. Here he was confident there would not be a dissentient voice, he would not therefore trouble their Lordships with any recommendations of that part of the address. As to that part which expressed a sense of the happinefs enjoyed under his Majesty’s just and constitutionai government, he observed that their Lordships could recollefl more proofs of the affectionate and paternal regard ever shewn by his Majesty, since his accessionto the throne, than he could. But one instance, one conspicu - ous proof and example of his Majesty’s regard to the consti - Vol. I. B tution

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1780.

tutioa and liberties of this country, of which, young as he was, he had been a witness, and which was recent in all their memories, he could not pass by on this occasion; and that was his conduct on the occasion of the late riots; but for the interposition of him, in whose royal breast the preservation of the state is the first concern, our liberties might have been destroyed, and that constitution, on which they depend, fub - verted. When private houses were in flames; when the prisons were opened; when force and outrage were exercised against that and the other House of Parliament 5 when the Bank was attacked, and this metropolis in the most imminent hazard of being laid in ashes, then the King interposed the force, with which he had been entrusted by the former Parliamentj for the salvation of this city; of our liberties, and erf the state. In this, every king would not have observed his conduCI—fome would have seized the opportunity of turning the arms of an enraged populace against thecivilcon - ftitution; and, uniting their arms with those of their military, have trampled upon the rights of the subjects. Such was the late conduct of a Northern Potentate, who had directed the fury of the people, and turned their power against ' the senate. His Majesty’s conduct was, on the contrary, that of the father of his people, and bespoke the worthy defendant and heir of the House of Hanover. As a farther proof that the supplies granted by the last Parliament last year, had neither been misapplied nor ufelefs. Lord Westmoreland ob - - served, that notwithstanding the powerful confederacy with which this nation is forced to contend, we had not in the course of this last year suffered any signal defeat; but, on the contrary, had gained several mighty advantages. A Spanish fleet, either funk in the ocean, driven on the Ihore, or serving, as the greater part of it did, in the British navy ! The combined fleet in the West - Indies,. after all their boasted fuperi - ority of numbers, flying, from our naval force, cautiojfly avoiding an engagement, and leaving us in "the undifputed posseflkn of the West - Indian Teas. Our commerce was protected, our dominions undiminished, and Georgia and Carolina extended. In the Eastern empire of Britain, not a power to dispute our sovereignty in ' th ' at quarter. Thus it appeared ' tojiis Lgrdftiip, that the conduCt of government, during the year paft, had not been unfortunate. -

With regard to the continuance of the war for another year, the talk was indeed arduous, but it was necessary France and Spain had united their whole faculties for the, furp - *, port

- A. i ? 8o. DEBATES.

port of the rebellion in North America, and with a view. thereby to cut off our commerce, the source of our wealth and power Tf we should lofb North Ainerica, consider the danger that must arise from the new Commonwealth, to our West - India iflands. These must soon fall into ' other hands than ours; and our commerce with the new world thus cut off, where shall we find shipping to support a navy that may secure to us our poliessions in Afia ? These two must, in that event, be distevered from the mother country, and we must be confined within the limits of thi - s ifland, which would only be ours, in case our hoftile and powerful neighbours should not agree about dividing the spoil. In such a difficult and dangerous jun&ure, it was better toperfevere, and expend the last shilling in our power, than fubmitto conditions of peace; which must put ourselves, and all that is dear to us, into the power of the enemy. Unanimity at home would yet make us respe&able, and even something beyond it, abroad. For while it must be confected that the part we have to a. ft is arr duous indeed, there are not wanting several topics of con ( b - lation and comfort. A firm, undivided, and compact power, has many advantages over such as are composed of different natives, having different views, opposite interests, and liable to be detached in the course of time and accidents from the common cause. It was a maxim of Rome never to make peace but with a conquered enemy. Lewis XIV. of France, was attacked with success by a combination of powerful and hoftile neighbours. Many of his provinces were torn from him, and his kingdom was on the brink of ruin; yet he de -. termined still to make war, and this invincible fortitude extricated him, as is universally known, from all his troubles. For he found means to break the alliance, and his kingdom was soon restored to its. former power and luftre.

It is true, that the continuance of the war must be extremely expensive; but Britain had carried on as. expendve wars, in causes of lefs importance to herfelf than the prefenr. Witness the war of the Spanish succession, and that which was undertaken in defence of the House of Auftria, and concluded at Aix - la - Chapelle. The credit of this nation is still good; whereas, that of our enemies, without exception, is nothing. Spain, with all its wealth, is forced to stamp by power a value on paper, which coercion sufficiently indicates its want of it. The shifts to which France is reduced, are of a similar nature. Paper has no currency in America. Its Currency cannot be enforced by the power of Congrefs ;

B % whereas

4

PARLIAME NT A R Y A. 1780.

whereas the paper credit of Great Britain flies whhout com - pulfion throughout the whole world.

As a proof of the straits and wants of the revolted. colonies in America, he took notice that they had for two or three years struggled to establish their paper credit, and to negotiate loans of money that might enable them to maintain armies of their own. But these attempts failing, they had recourse to an expedient which no nation ever adopted, and retained its freedom. They had taken the desperate re - solution of inviting French troops into their country; amea - sure which prognofticated good things to this nation. Oh I but, said Lord Westmoreland, some will say, the more the Americans are driven to the neceflity of contracting close alliances, and of mingling interests and adhering to France, the more certainly they will be loft to us. We will, however, Continued his Lordship, be of a very different opinion, when we refle&, that the more closely they are connected, the more they are brought together and mingle their affairs, the more naturally will arile jealousies and quarrels With regard to the merit or demerit of the present adminift ration, his Lord - ship said that that was a relative or comparative idea. '

We may account administration good, or tolerable, at leaft, if we know of none in whose hands public affairs would be safer, and who would fill their places better than they do. Men form a falle estimate of men in power, by tacitly comparing them, not with the men of their own day, but with other men of other periods, who‘have blazed like meteors in a Harm, and been fortunate enough, by bravely daring tQ. meet success j but who, had the storm they ruled continued, might have met a different fate, and consequently have been differently represented by fame. He here affirmed, that to condufl the present was an infinitely greater talk than to manage the last war : for in that \ye contended with America on our fide against France, $nd now we ffruggle against both France, America, and Spain. As to Spain having joined France in the last war, France was at the last gasp; and Spain, near the end of the battle, came in action merely to receive herlhareof thedilgrace,

All these things being considered ( to which alone his Lord - ship confined himself, without enquiring into {he rife of the American war, and the capfe of its continuance ) he thought $t wifer to perfevere in vyar, than to agree to conditions of peace cli&ated by our enemies, or to any truce, which would n fa& be thp fame thing with a defeat. He therefore moved,

A. 178® DEBATES. $ '

that an humble address be presented to his Majesty, the fub - stance of which was, a congratulation oh the safe delivery of the Queen, and the birth of another Prince; an approbation of his Majesty’s government, and of his intention to prosecute the w ^ r another year with firmness and vigour.

Lord Brawnlow, thought it unnecessary to add any thing inLd. Brown support of, a motion so ably recommended. The House ^ w. would rejoice in the safe : delivery of the Queen, and the birth of a Prince, events which would give the King so much satis - faction, and which. would prove an encrease of that happinefs which he so well deserved. He approved entirely of venturing even ourdaft - flake rather than tamely yield to the designs of our enemies, by cutting off our commerce, to reduce our power, and to bring us under their subjection. Wherefore, he seconded the motion that had ' been made by the noble Lord who spoke before him.

The Marquis of Carmarthen rofe to speak, when the Duke The Mar - of Devonshire, and one or two more Peers, coming into House, a question arose whether they could be sworn at any hour paft four o ? clock; there being a law of Parliament, that all Peers should be sworn in between the hours, of nine and four o ’ clock.. Lord Denbigh, Lord Sandwich,. Lord Abingdon, and the Duke of Richmond spoke to this point of order; the two latter noblemen contending for an adjournment, and the two former against it, but on different principles. In the mean time the Handing order of the House was read, whence it appeared, that all Peers should be sworn in before four o ’ clock.

Lord Mamfield said he did not know of any such order; Lord Mam - but he had examined since this question of order arose, and field. had found an addition in the order, permitting the House, on any occasion that might in their judgments justify a departure from that rule, to do it. Though the order enjoined as a rule of business to administer the usual oaths to Peers before four o ’ clock, it did not hinder them to ^ do the fame thing, when there fl > ould be. any neceflity for doing so, after four o ’ clock, and they were judges of that neceflity. There was nothing more then to do, than to put the question, whether this order should, in the present cale, be dispensed with. This pbfervation of Lord Mansfield satisfied the House; the question was put; the order was dispensed with; and the Peers were sworn in.

The Marq, of Carmarthen then rofe up again, and said, that The Mar - with regard to the first part of the address he prefumed there < r, i of Cafm

would

6 PARLIAMENTARY A. i. f8a

would not be a diffentient voice. Placed, as he now was, at an humble distance from the throne, he Rill felt the firicereft satisfaction in every event which tended to encreale the felicity of the royal family. With regard to other matters contained in the proposed address, the noble Lord had entered into a wide field, and taken a very large ' and extensive scope.. If ever there was a moment, the Marquis proceeded, when unanimity was requifite, and when it was necessary to lay aside the little prejudices, which we are. all conscious, said he ^ vof feeling in some degree, it is the present : and lince the effects of unanimity and concord are confessedly so great, if the omiilion of a sentence, or any thing that ' can easily be omitted, may produce unanimity, I hope that it will be omitted.

His Lordship then said, that he approved the whole of the addrefr, until the conclusion of that paragraph which allured his Majesty of the willingnefs and zeal of the House to concur in any measures that might be necessary for the support of Iiis. Majesty’s government, and the preservation of their essen - tial rights and interefls; but all that part of the address which countenanced and encouraged the continuance of the war, the Marquis was for rejecting; and that rejection or the leaving it out of the address, he proposed as an amendment, He adverted to the powerful confederacy formed against us, to the suspicious intentions of tjiofe that were called the neutral powers; to our being in want of all allies to support us under such a weight, and without any profpedt of being delivered from the evils that surrounded us.

He could not speak from authority, but it was in every body’s mouth, and the world believed it. was true, that the counsels in the cabinet were Audiuating and various. There were different fadtions even amongst administration themselves. What one minister or councillor was for, another was against; one council was adopted to - day, another to - morrow; one day the word was, pufh the war with vigour; the next, let us try what ' we can do by negotiation; let us try what we can do in Europe, or in America. One plan of operations is lent to America this month, and the next, before the former has been tried, another is sent quite different. Op the whole, his Lordship expedfed not any good from the pre sent war, or the present condudtors of it; he, therefore, con - r eluded with moving the amendment already specified.

The Earl of The Earl of Abingdon was against both the address and the "Mingdoiu ari ^ etidipent, Amendments were generally good for nothing ;

they

A : 1780. D E ', B A T E S. fy

they only served to make the add refs themorc palatable. Hfe would speak his mind freely. The addition of another Prince to the royal family was no matter, of joy to him, since there was no provision that he knew of for so numerous a royal progeny. Thirteen, colonies were loftj which would have been a provision for thirteen children. He was for throwing out the address altogether. The associations were going forward; a new order of affairs would succeed, which would render minutiae such as addresses quite needlefs. He wiflied the people might obtain a new Magna Charta. It was in the reign of the good King John that the old one was obtained. He wiflied for a new declaration of the rights of the people. The present system of governmerit, he said, was arbitrary. There was a system of defpotism going on; for defpotism, or arbi - trary government, consisted in governing by will, not by law.

The whole grievances of the people flowed from their not making a distin&ion between legislative and executive power, both of Which powers they confound together, and call fu - preine; but the legislative power only is supreme. And why is it supreme ? Because alL laws are founded in nature; all lavvs that we are bound to obey; but laws that are arbitrary are enforced by violence, by art, which are the contrary of ' nature. If it be true that laws founded in nature are to be obeyed, laws founded in force are not to be obeyed. Dues.

\ propojitiones contraries non pqflunt Jimul ejje verge *,

On a division of the House, the addref ^ was carried, con - tents, 68; not contents, 23. '

| The Earl of - Aylesbury moved, that an humble address be The Earl 06 presented by the House to the Queen, congratulating her Aylefiury *

I Majesty on her happy delivery, and on the birth of a Prince.

| Lord Southampton said, that though he had scarcely passed Lord Smtk *, the threfhold of the House, he could not refrain from second - amttoa '

I ing a motion, which would give him an opportunity of carrying so joyful a meffage to the royal ears. This motion was. agreed to unanimously.

' November 2.

. The Address presented.

The humble Address of the Right Honourable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament assembled.

Die Afereurii, 1 Novembris, 1780.

Most gracious Sovereign, '

WE, your Majesty’s most dutiful and loyal subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament assembled, beg

leave

t

PAU I A M E T A R Y A. 1780,

leave. to return your Majesty our humble thanks for your j most gracious speech from the throne.

Permit us to offer to your Majesty our most dutiful congratulations on the birth of another Prince, and the happy recovery of the Queen, and to assure your Majesty, that every addition to your Majesty’s domestic happinefs must always afford the highest satisfaction to your faithful subjects.

In the present arduous lituation of public affairs, we think j it an indispensable part of our duty to makethofe spirited and vigorous exertions which such a conjuncture demands; and we beg leave to assure your1 Majesty, that we are united in a J firm resolution to decline no difficulty or hazard in the de - j fence of our country, and for the preservation of our essen - = tial interests. ‘ {

It is. with just and heart - felt indignation that we fee the \ monarchies of France and Spain leagued in confederacy to ! support the rebellion in your Majesty’s colonies in North - { America, and employing the whole force of those kingdoms I in the prosecution of a war waged in violation of all publicp faith, and for the foie purpose of gratifying boundless ambi - tion, by destroying the commerce, and giving a fatal blow to the power of Great - Britain.,

We have leen with great satisfaction that the force which, I with just confidence, was entrusted, to your Majesty by Par - 1 liament, has, by the blessing of Divide Providence on the i bravery of your fleets and armies, enabled your - Majesty to withstand the formidable attempts of your enemies, and to frustrate the great expe£tations they had conceived; and we j hope and trust that the success of your Majesty’s arms in} Georgia and Carolina, gained with so much honour to the f cpnduft and courage of your Majesty’s officers, and to the valour ^ nd intrepidity of your troops, will have the most im ' - p portant consequences, and that such signal events, followed I by those vigorous measures which your Majesty recommends, I and in which we are determined to concur, will disappoint all j the views of our enemies, and restore the blessings of a fafcij and honourable peace. E

We are satisfitd that the only way to accomplish this great f end, which your Majesty lb earnestly desires, is to make such > powerful and relpe£table preparations as shall convince our enemies that we will not lubmit to receive the law from any ^ powers whatever, ' but, with that spirit and resolution which ) becomes us, will maintain the essential rights, honour, and; dignity of Great - Britain.

A. - iytdi t ) E j A f i S ;

We have a deep arid moll grateful sense of the constant lo - licitude your Majesty Ihews to promote the true interests and happiriefs of all your subjects and to prelerve inviolate our excellent cohftitution in church and state. Arid vve beg leave humbly to allure your Majesty that it shall be our earnest endeavour to justify and deserve the confidence which your Majesty so graciously places in our affection, duty, and zeal.

Ordered that the laid address be presented to his Majesty by the whole House.

His Majesty’s Anfwen

My Lords,

I THANK you. heartily for this very loyal and dutiful address.

The ' joy ' ybu express in the increase of rriy family, and in the Tappy recovery of the Queen, is extremely agreeable to me.

Your wife and spirited resolutions to profecure the war with vigour, and to maintain, at every hazard, the essential interests dignity, and honour of Great - Britain, give me the highest satisfaction, and mull be productive of the most faiutary ef - fefts, both at home and abroad.

November 3.

The Lord Chancellor rofe and laid, a rumour had reached his The Lord fears of an infult having been offered, and a farther infult Chancell ° r threatened, to one of their Lordships; that the whole of the report was so uniformly ponfonant, that although it was im - possible for the House to take up the matter in its present stage, of for him to suggest to their Lordships what would be the proceedings which might poffibly be neoelTary, when the whole fast, and ' all its relative circumstances, were formally and cor - i ' eftly before the House, yet he had thought it peculiarly incumbent on him to rife, not to inform, but to remind their Lordships, that such a rumbur had prevailed, and to Hate to their Lordships, with all due submission, that it was their duty to take some step in relation to the rumour, which to their wifdom should seem most likely to refeue the House from fb great an indignity as it would unavoidably fuftaiii, if an infult was permitted to be offered to the person of any one Peen He had only to add, that if, by accident, any of the noble Lords present - were perfectly in possession of certain faftsftated in the rumour, or of any letters tending to shew what those faffs were it would be an aft of duty, on their parts, and of obligation to the House to commuriicate the lame to their Lordships.

Earl of Jcrfey rofe, and said, a correspondence tending to Earl of Yol L G the

The Lord

Chancellor.

The Lord Chancellor.

The Du ' ie of Grafton.

the most, serious consequences. had taken place between two noble Peers of that House, which, unless immediate steps were taken, might be fatal to one or both of the parties. His Lordship was then called upon for their names; he replied, the Duke of Grafton and Lord Pomfret and his Lord - ship moved, that those two Peers be summoned to attend in their places on some future day.

. The Lord Chancellor rofe again, and acquainted the House, that he believed the first Hep to be taken, and the most agreeable to order, was, to direct the two right honourable members to attend in their places on a certain day .; - -

The Lord Chancellor then put the motion,

c That his Grace the Duke of Grafton and the Earl of Pomfret do attend this House. in their places next Monday, the 6th.

November 6.

The order of Friday, for the attendance of the Duke of Grafton and Lord Pomfret, was read. '

The Lord Chancellor then observed, that a noble Earl ( Jersey ) had stated in his place on Friday, though previous to such notice there were strong and probable.. rumours to the lame purport, that a noble Duke and a noble Earl, members of that House, had had a correspondence which from itscom - p. lexion and tendency was likely to be productive of very fatal consequences. X ^ pon this information the order now read was made by the House, and as he perceived that in compliance with that order both the Lords were in their places, he meant the Duke of Grafton and the Farl of Pomfret; and as it was impossible for the House to proceed further in the business without being informed of the circumstances alluded to, it was expected that the noble Lords, or either of them, would state to the House, as members, how far they were respeClively concerned.

The Duke of Grafi. cn then rofe, and begged leave to inform their Lordships, that he was there in nis place in consequence of their Lordships ’ order; that he thought it his duty to obey the orders of the House at all times, and upon all oc - calions, for which reason, with the permission of the House, he should proceed lo give a faithful account of what pafted, as far as came within his knowledge. He should avoid detail as much aspoflible, and omit every circumstance which was not Supported by facts,.

. He should just observe, that the noble Earl near him and he had never any disagreement whatever; that he always en -

~ tertained

A. 1780. D E BAT E S.

tertained an high respe£l and esteem for his Loidship; and that of course, what had recently happened seemed to him the more unaccountable.

To his utter astonishment, on Sunday fortnight, the 22d wit. early in the morning, at his feat of Eufton - hall in Suffolk, he received the following letter, which he begged to be indulged so far as that the clerk might read it. He laid, it was a letter ligned Pomfret; and it having been offered. Lord Pomfret acknowledged it to be his hand - writing. He said the letter was delivered to him as coming from the noble Earl, who, he understood from the bearer, was waiting for an answerat the inn at the Park Gate,

The letter was then handed to the clerk, apd read by him. It imported, that his Lordship was waiting for him with a case of piftols and a sword, and demanded satisfaction; the cau ( e of which demand was, that the noble Duke, to whom the letter was directed, had provided for and protected a fer - vantof his, one Langftaffj lately discharged; and concluded with pofitively demanding immediate satisfaction.

His Grace, as loon as the letter was read, profeffed he ne ver was so astonished in his life. He had never till that in - ffant so much as heard of Lapgftaff’s name, and had conti -. pued always to live upon the most friendly terms with the noble Earl, from their earliest acquaintance; and he could affirm, as the great God was his judge, he neither directly nor indirefUy had any hand in providing for Langftaff.

Surprized at the extraordinary tenor of the letter, but con - fcious of his ovvn innocence, he immediately wrote the noble Lord an apfwer, The answer was read, and was to the following purport That he knew nothing whatever of the supposed ground of offence; profeffed his high esteem for his Lordship; begged that the noble Earl would either of receipt come to Eufton, or when - a friend of his, who was then at, church, should return, he would fend him to wait on the noble Lord to explain the matter to him, and convince him that there was not the moil distant colour for the displeasure lie had conceived against him.

In what he had done hitherto his Grace said he had confuted no one, but as fopp as his friend returned, he imparted the whole matter to him, and they both wept to the inn to enqui. e for the noble Lord; but when they came there, could get no account of any such person. He had himself perceived a chaise at a distance, and went to the place where he had seep it ? and enquiring at a cottage near which the chaise flood,

Q % wa£

? 2

PARLIAMENTARY A. iytfo.

^ as informed that as fbon as the servant went back to the chaise, orders were given to the driver to turn thehorfes the : Pther way, and it inflantly drove off.

Jn the evening of the fame day he received a letter dated from Barton - Mills, five o ’ clock, which was likewise handed to, and read By the clerk. This letter, after passing some handlbme compliments on the npble Duke ' s public conduct, arid professing himself perfectly satisfied with His Grace’s con - du£t, proceeded to state the grpunds of his suspicion, - and of course his motives for writing the letter delivered in the morning. Tr observed that Langftaff had been his gamerkeeper, and that he had discharged him; that Langftaff vowed vengeance on his being difpiiffed from his service; that he had lately cauled him to be apprehended, and brought before two rnagistrates on suspicion, and that one Smyth, his Grace’s huntfman, had interested hiqafelf in Langftaff’s behalf before the rnagistrates, laying that Langftaff was under his Grace’s protection, who had lately provided for him in the excise; and that ip consequence of his Grace’s name, and the influence annexed to it, Langftaff had been set at liberty. His causes of complaint against Langftaff were then state ' d; and he concluded his letter by testifying his perfect satisfaClion, provided the noble Duke would infill that Smyth should dif - avow having any authority frqm his ( Brace for making ufe of his name.

This letter being read, his Grace said, by the time it; reached him, his huntfman had cqme from Vy ' hirtlebury fqrelt, in Northamptonshire, and informed him, that Mr. Smytly was to set off on Monday, the next day, with the dogs and hunters for Eufton. This being a distance of ninety miles, he concluded, that Mr. Smyth would pot reach Eufton till Wednesday evening; he did not therefore lofe a minute’s time, but instantly wrote a note, and dispatched a servant with it to Barton - ivlills, where, he prefumed, the noble Earl might have relied for the evening, desiring the servant howr ever to bring back the note if. he should not find Lord Pom - fret there. The servant accordingly did so, and learnt, that the horses which drew the carriage were Barton - Mills hories, but ihat the noble Lord had; gone back to the last poll. In, this note lie Hated the circumstance of his e. xpeCting Mr.. Smyth at Eufton the enfui. ng, Wednesday, and of his taking the earlii ft opportunity -, after Mr.. Smyth’s arrival, of causing him to write a Tettqr to the nob. le Earl ., containing a true state; gf the tranlaClion, and of ccurfe informing his Lordship - thafc

A. 1780.

DEBATESI

he knew ' nothing at all of Langftaff, and if any one had made ufe of his name in the affair, it was totally without any authority from him.

So the matter refted. His Grace said, that on this note being returned to him by the fervarit he sent with it to Bar - ton - lVJills, he transmitted it, by the general poft, to his Lord - ill ip, at Eufton, near Northampton.

On the arrival of Mr. Smyth at Eufton, he imparted to him what had palfed, and Mr. Smyth immediately wrote to his Lordship, denying every thing respecting Langftaff, of which his Lordship had been informed, so far as the feme respected his Grace.

He remained at Eufton till Wednesday Iaft, and arrived in town on Friday, when, about five o ’ clock in the afternoon, he received a third letter from the noble Earl.

This letter was likewise read by the Clerk, and after declaring that his refentments had returned ;, charged his Grace, in the foulest and most unbecoming language, with cowardice; gave no credit to his repeated assertions; and accused him with acting basely, and, if our memory serves us right, with being a f - - - pi.

After the several letters were read, his Grace expressed him - self in very moderate terms, and with a candour and gene - rofity that did hitn great honour.

As soon as his Grace fat down, the Earl of Pomfirct rofe. Earl of His Lordship opposed strongly the reading of the last letter, Bom/mu but was called three or four times to order by the Chancellor.

His general defence, though consisting of a great variety of

particulars, may be thus shortly comprised r - - - That he had '

a game keeper, one LangftafF,. who being disappointed of being made his steward, conceived the worst intentions against : himself, family, and ho ufe, denouncing destruction against them all r that before he quitted his service, he endeavoured - to carry some of his threats into execution, particularly against ' one of his Tons, whom he endeavoured to allure to the fta - bles, and knock on the head with some deadly weapon, under pretence that the horse or horses had kicked him. That before he left his service, he had frequently and loudly denounced those threats; that he had a fine colt ripped open, and his entrails let out, by this man : that he had him apprehended, upon suspicion of the felony, and let him go, on. condition that he would keep out of Towcester and its neighbourhood : that he was induced to take this step, merely on the account of the safety of his o\yn - person, his wife, and children.

P A R L I A M E N T A R Y A. i So,

dren all of whom, he feared, would fall by the hands of this alTaffin, and his house and furniture be destroyed by fire ;

Thatj for the benefit of the air, hp and his family removed to a place near tovyn, for which he was indebted to his Ma - jesty’s goodnefsj where he remained till he returned to his feat in Northamptonshire on the 12th of October, where he confefTed he was equally filled with alarm and indignation, on being informed that LangftafF was returned in the capacity of an assistant to the officer of excise for the district of Tow - cester. His fears and apprehensions again returned for his wife, children, and property, and they soon appeared to be well founded, for he had a fine colt lamed by the malicious means employed by LangftafF, who prevailed on the farrier, who fliod him, to drive two nails up the quick or frog of two of his feet, so as to render him quite ufelefs,

On this ground he had the villain taken up on suspicion, and brought before two justices, but through the interference of Smyth, the noble Duke’s huntfman, who made ufe of the noble Duke’s name, the fellow was let to go at large. Under such a distress of mind, in continual fear for his wife and children, for himself and his property, and finding ' no re - dress nor profpett of retlrefs, lo long as the fellow continued to be thus so powerfully supported, he was led to take, the steps he did, and though now he was ready to give his honour to take no further notice of what had happened, lo far as the fame respe&ed the noble Duke, he looked upon it that he had no right to pay any great degree of credit to what had passed, nor could he say but he had strong motives of refentment, which had only be. en suspended, not subsided, when, instead of a satisfactory declaration from the noble Duke, he referred him to a written explanation to be given by his huntfman. He received the letter alluded to by the noble Duke from Smyth, which he would read; but taking all the circumstances, and considering them together, he had no right to be pleased, and he was now enabled to fee to the bottom of of the whole, and lee clearly where the matter originated, Smyth was his Grace’s huntfman, and in his intimacy he procured the place for LangftafF, and rode about the country \yith him, giving him his countenance, and reporting that he was prote£ ! ed by the noble Duke, Mr. Stonehewer was the person who procured him the place, and the matter was every way clear in itfelf.

HisvLordship here read Mr. Smyth’s explanatory letter, dated Eufton, in part, and after he had proceeded handed it

j A. 78/1. r > E B A T t S,

{ to the clerk, observing, that it was such an heap of nonfenfe \ and ignorance that he could not bear to read it ;

I Theletterftatedthatfeveraiperfonsintheneighbourhoodhad \ applied to him, Smyth, to endeavour to procure for Langftaff - •j a place in the excise; that in consequence of this application he recommended him to Mr. Stonehewer, one of the com - J missioners of excise, who. lent down an order to have him in - t strutted preparatory to his appointment; in consequence of I which the excise officer of Towcester, it being the next place ‘

j to his residence, had orders, to instruft him; that as to the; apprehensions of Langftaff’s remaining there, they were to -; tally unfounded, for having wrote to the supervisor of excise, i he allured him that it was a rule never to appoint a man t6 a I district, where he was instructed, nor in the county where he j was born; and as to what passed before the justices on the ap - i prehension of Langftaff, he was discharged merely because < art affidavit was made, by a person that the night his Lordship’s - colt was so cruelly treated, Langftaff flept in his house.

5 This letter being read, his Lordship reiterated several of i his former arguments, - pleaded; his well - founded apprehen - \ lions of the diabolical intentions of Langftaff against his fa -; mily, spoke much of his weaknefs, and the means that had ’ i been made ufe of to prejudice the public against him, and; submitted to their Lordships, whether, under such a load of i obloquy, oppressioq, provocation, and ill - treatment, he had; not great cause of refentment. His Lordship by no means; seemed to be reconciled, at leaft. with Mr. Smyth and some j others; and though he seemed willing to decline perfifting in i his former refentments against the noble Duke, he was far from acknowleding the steps he had taken against his Grace ! had no just foundation.

As loon as his Lordship fat down, the Lord Chancellor ^ Lord \ suggested the propriety of having one or both the noble Lords r ^ anctUQr -; withdraw, according as the House might think proper to de - i termine. The only leading precedent on the journals, both; the noble Lords withdrew, previous to the consideration of the business; but that precedent was not exactly in point, as the noble Lords ordered to withdraw were both culpable, whereas on the present occasion no complaint, either direct or; implied, was imputed to the noble Duke. He wilhed, however, for the direction of the House.

A pause ensued, and his Lordship observed, as nothing specific was said, he was to prefume it was the sense of the j House that both Lords should withdraw. He then moved it, and it was ordered.

4

Another

£& ' PARLIAMENTARY A. 1780.

Another question arose, whether they should withdraw into separate rooms *

After a short interruption, Lord Pomfret wiflied that they might withdraw into - the fame room - He pledged his honour, if their Lordships did permit it, nothing should happen in consequence of it, _. ..

It. ivias at length agreed that their Lordships should retire intofeparate rooms. • '

Lor d Cam - As soon as the noble Lords withdrew, Lord Camden rofe, ttu ' and laid he should just throw out a few hints to the House for their Lordships *. .. cqmsideration and if what he might offer jfhould meet the sense of the House, or the House should go along - with him, ' he would move a question on it, otherwise. he meant not to offer any thing as independently coming from himself.

The first obje£l as a general one to be Considered was, Whe - ther the noble Earl who had sent the challenge ( for as to criminality in the noble Duke it was totally out of the question ) should be considered as a criminal; and if so, whait kind of punishment he was liable to undergo ? If - his Lotdship should be deemed a criminal, it would be necessary to have recourfd to precedents. The only precedents. which recurred to his memory, were those of Lords Middlesex and Bridgewater in the reign of Charles the Second; and of Lords Granville and Keith in the reign of King William. Here his Lord - ship gave a narrative of the whole proceedings in respect of the former, and moved that the Journal might be read, which was done accordingly, *

The

A nobleman having enticed away, with a purpose of marrying, a daughter of the Earl of Bridgwater, that nobleman wrote a letter to Sir Chichester Wrey, containing some suspicions that the Earl of Miadlesex was privy to his daughter’s elopement, or was assisting in it, upon which Lord Middlesex sent Lord Bridgewater a challenge. This eircumftance coming to the King’s knowledge, he inteiposed, and endeavoured to reconcile them. This interposition not having the deiired eftedf, his Majesty propoied to their Lordship ?, that lour noble Lords, two on each fide, should be acquainted with the circumstances; and that they should abide by what the Lords ( arbitrators ) agreed. A report was made, but Lord Middlesex refuted to acquiesce. Two more Lords were added on each fide, but they were equally unfuccefsful in obtaining the desired obieit, fresh obstacles having been thrown in the way by Lord Middlesex.

The

A. 1780. DEBATES *.

The first entry on the Journal was the 8th of June, 1663, the 15th of Charles If. when, upon a letter wrote by Lord Bridgewater to Sir Chichester Wrey, it appeared that Lord Middlesex sent Lord Bridgewater a challenge, of which the latter accepted; that the King took the business upon him - ielf, and appointed first two, and then four, noble Lords oi > each fide to settle the matter, but the parties were implacable, and refufed to abide by their determination; that afrer - w. arcls he referred it to a commission in the office of the Earl Marshal, whose determination met with the fate of that made by the Lords, Arbitrators; and finally, that the King sent a special meflage by the Lord Privy Seal to that House, to take up the matter itfelf. Each day’s proceedings in the House were read; and after the matter undergoing several dilcuf - fions, namely, on the 8th, 12th, and 25th of June, and 2d of July, in the early llages of which the Earl of Middlesex was

lent

The King, however, to leave no means untried, issued an order to constitute a Commission in the office of the Earl Marshal of England, as a court of honour, entitled to have cognizance of such matters. The court, in compliance with his Majesty’s orders,

' proceeded to esquire, and heard proofs; but there being no obligation on the parties to obey the determination come to in the committee thus constituted, both the noble Lords declined to abide by it.

This incensed h s Majesty greatly, who sent a meflage by the Lord Privy Seal to the House, desiring that their Lordships might dnterpose their authority, expressing at the fame time how much he was displeased with the conduit of the two noble Lords.

We should have taken notice, that during these several proceedings, Lords Middlesex and Bridgewater were in custody; for as soon as the King had the first intimation of the quarrel, he gave direilions that their Lordships should be put under arrest, where they still remained.

When the Privy Seal therefore delivered the meflage relative to the business, the House immediately ordered that - the noble Lords should be taken into the custody of the Gentleman Ulher of the Black Rod. This being complied wiih, the House proceeded to take the matter into consideration; and after long debate, a motion was made, and question put, which was resolved in the affirmative, that Lords Middlesex and Bridgewater, the one for fending, and the other for receiving, a challenge, had 2 < sted highly in contempt of the respect due to that House. After which another motion was made, that for their said contempt the Earl of Middlesex be com - mitted to the Tower, and the said Earl of Bridgewater to the cuf - todyof the Black Rod. ——The - two noble Lords were called to the L3r, and informed by the Speaker of the order of the House.

• Vol. I. D A com -

i8

Lord Cam - ' d h *

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1780.

sent to the Tower, and Lord Bridgewater committed to the custody of Black Rod; the event of the whole was, that they were both ordered to come to the bar, and make satisfaction to the House, and be there reprehended by the Speaker; and after they came to their respective places, to rife and be reconciled, the offender, or challenger, confessing his offence, and alking pardon of the other noble Lord *

The other, precedents of Lords Granville and Keith were likewise read, with all their circumstances, as : Rated in the > Journals of the year 1690

This being finished. Lord Camden rofe again, and wished, as he said, to feel the sense of the Hpufe respecting what it might be proper to do; but here a silence of several minutes ensued, upon which he said he mull decline going further.

A committee was appointed to consider of the proper mode of proceeding, who, on the 12th of June, reported, by the inouthof. their chair main. Lord Alhley, afterwards Earl of Shaftfbury, which report underwent several alterations. A motion was made, that said report, thus altered, be now received, which, after long debate, paired in the negative.

On the 2$th the report was taken off the table, and the mode of future proceeding dil ' cufled. The business was further adjourned to the 27th, when the following mode of conducting the business was finally determined upon.

That on a. certain day ( July the 2d ) the two noble Lords should come to ^ he bar, and on their knees crave pardon of his Majesty and the House, whole government and dignity they had iufulted. Alter which the Speaker was to reprehend th. em severally for the high offence they had committed. fr

After this they were to be admitted into the House, and after they came to their places, they were again to apologize to tfye House, and the Lord who sent the challenge, to alk the noble Lord ' s pardon to whom he sent it, and both the noble Lords to be reconciled.

On the 2d of July » 1663, those formalities which had been pre~ viously settled were complied with, and here the affair ended.

Thedifference between Lord Granville and Lord Keith was not so minutely attended to A challenge paired between the noble Lords, in which Colonel Granville, afterwards the celebrated Lord Lanf - down, was to be second to - Lord Granville, and Colonel Trig to Lord Keith. Notice was given to the House, arid the two Lords ordered to attend in their places. ^ Lord Granyille paid obedience to the order; ‘but Lord Keith refufed, till at length an order was given to break doors.

The two Lords were then brought to the bar, reprimanded, and afterwards reconciled in the House,

9

A. i7§a. DEBATES.

unless he should previously understand it to be the sense of the House.

Another pause ensued; at length the Chancellor rofe, and The Lord made a very able speech; stated the precedents, and said their Lordships had a choice to adopt one or the other, or to strike out a new one. The tenor of his speech rather tended to a recommendation of some exemplary proceeding.

The Marquis of Rockingham said a few words; the case The Ma - was a new one,; that neither of the precedents exactly came,.. up to it; and threw out some hints of infanity, and the dan - oc wg ger of permitting the noble Earl, in his present state of mind from going at large.

Lord Camden ^ when he rofe the second time, said, that theLt ) r < J noble Earl, though he had given his word of honour nqtt toden ' take any further step, did not appear to be convinced that he had acted without provocation.

The Marquis of Camarthen pointed out the neceflity of the The Mar - House declaring the act committed by the noble Lord to have ? “is ° fjZarr ' been criminal, and consequently deserving of punishment; he”ar. therefore moved that the noble Lord acted in contempt of that House.

This being agreed to, he moved next that the noble Lord be committed to the Tower, which was agreed to.

Agreeably to precedent, Lord Pomfret was ordered to the bar, and informed by the Lord Chancellor that it was their Lordships ’ pleasure that he be committed to the Tower.

As soon as Lord Pomfret retired, in custody of Black Rod, the Marquis of Carmarthen moved, that the Duke ofThe Mar - Grafton had acted with respect to the House, and perfectly conformable to the principles of a man of honour; which was agreed to.

A warrant of commitment was then made in the name of the House, and iigned by the Chancellor, directed to the Lieutenant of the Tower of London, to receive and keep in custody the body of the Earl of ' Pomfret, till delivered by due oourfe of law.

No business till

November 15.

The Earl of Pomfret having prefenfed a petition, the order of the day. was read for taking the fame into consideration.

The petition was read.

The. humble petition of the right honourable George Fermor, Earl of Pomfret *

03 ( ( Humbly

aQ PARLIAMENTARY A. 1780.

Lord Of. iarne.

The Marquis of Car Earthen,

c Humbly sheweth,

et That your petitioner hath, ever lince he fell into the displeasure of this honourable House been highly afflicted,

. that he should upon any account whatsoeve. r deserve to be separated from that House, of which he hath the honour to be a Member.

“ That your petitioner doth in all humility acknowledge his offences, and your justice in all that you have ordered concerning him.

e May it therefore please your Lordships to take into your mo ft honourable considerations, the deep sense your petitioner hath, that he hath juflly deserved the displeasure of your Lordships, and doth most humbly implore the grace and favour of this honourable House, in pardoning his offences, and restoring him to their good opinion, and the effects of it.

And your petitioner, &c.

POMFRET. ”

L. ox&Ojborne, Marquis of Carmarthen, thenrofe up, and acquainted their Lordships, that the House were in possession of all the facts relative to the melancholy event reipe£ling the noble Earl, and of his commitment.

That he had searched the Journals for precedents, in order to inform himself what steps were proper for the House next to take in consequence of so high a contempt, and therefore with submission he should iirft move,

' 1 ft, That the right honourable George Fermor, Earl of Pomfret, db have the reprehension of this House, for his offence committed against this House, given at the bar standing.

2dly, That the Earl of Pomfret do make his humble fub - million to this House ( landing in his place *

3 < 31y, That the Earl of Pomfret do engage upon his honour not to prosecute further any measures of violence or refent - ment against any persons who may have been the objects thereof.

These several questions were put to the House by the Lord Chancellor, and agreed to nem. dljprt.

November 16.

The Marquis of Carmarthen, as chairman of the committee of privileges, to whom the consideration of the Earl of Pomfret’s petition was referred, rofe and read the report of laid committee. It was afterwards read by the clerk at the table, and agreed to without any amendment, by the House.

A. 1781. D £ B A T E S.

It was in substance as follows : that the Earl ' of Pomfret be brought up to the bar, as the next day, in the custody of the Lieutenant of the Tower; that, {landing at the bar, he be acquainted with the proceedings had in his Lordship’s absence, and be reprimanded, in terms expressive of the sense the House conceive of the breach of privilege he had been guilty of, and the high infult given to the dignity of that House by his. Lordship, in fending letters to his Grace the Duke of Grafton, containing a challenge to fight, and couched in terms of abuse and personal reproach, unfit to be sent to any right honourable member of that House. To likewise acquaint the noble Earl, that their Lordships had remitted the punishment, juftly due to so high an offence, aggravated as it was, by all the cirumftances which accompanied it, on account of the humble petition presented to the House by his Lordship, containingan acknowledgment of his said offence, and expressing a sorrow for his having done any thing which could have brought upon him the displeasure of their Lordships. The seport further flated, that it would be expe£led, that the noble Earl should acknowledge, that the refentments conceived by him against the noble Duke, had been founded in the miftaken apprehension of an affront, which, he was convinced, the noble Duke did not offer; and finally declare, upon his honour, that all his former refentments and fufpi - cions were at an end; and that they should cease, as well in respect of the noble Duke against whom they appeared to be chiefly directed, as the several other persons who had been obje£ls of them.

The other order of the day was then read for the House to be summoned, on a motion of the Duke of Bolton, on which Dufeeaf his Grace rofe, and entered into a kind of abstract {late oiBilton ' the nation. His Grace observed, that in this critical and very unusual situation of the country, when the landed in « terest was oppressed beyond all example, from the nation ' s being engaged in a war of so ruinous and expensive a nature, that although every year’s continuance of that war inevitably added to the enormous burthen of our public debt, including the money spent, whether raised within the year or borrowed, at an exorbitant interest, at the rate of nearly twenty millions per annum, to compare what was perfprmed in return for this. wafteful profusion of treafure; to oppofe the advantages to the disadvantages, and by striking a balance, learn whether the nation had been a lofer or gainer. This, he believed, could oot be so well decided upon in any other way,

as

AA PARLIAMENTARY

as by having reference to the events of the last. year, he would not say disgraceful, but most certainly inative and inglorious, campaign, there was no profpect of a fortimate issue of that

war, nor indeed of any issue. It, would not perhaps be thought prefumptuous for an individual, infignificant as he

was, to call their Lordships ’ attention to the present moil alarming state of affairs in general. The language of the times was, his Grace said, like the times themselves, altogether extraordinary and new. In former wars, when this country was ever so hard prefled by her enemies, the speeches from the throne, and the speeches of ministers, held out to the people jomething of comfort, some hopes of a better turn of for - - tune. At present neither the speeches of his Majesty, nor the speeches of hisservants, afforded any thing that amounted to express a satisfaCtory feeling, as to our future profpeCls— on the contrary, all was dismay, and nothing ' was heard from any quarter but the tremendoufnefs of the confederacy again# us, and the great power and mighty preparations of the family alliance, the alliance of the House of Bpurbon ! Of that alliance he had at different times heard very different language. The late Earl of Chatham, he remembered, used to warn the House of that alliance. Others had said, it was an alliance to be laughed at. Without adopting either opinion, he begged leave to ask what had ministers to shew, or what argument could they urge to prove, that their country was in a better Hate now, than it had been in the last year ? He knew not where to turn his eyes in ordei to find that our fttuation was improved. In America, what had we done ? loft Rhode Island, the only good winter harbour on that fide the Atlantic, which was now by well planned additional works rendered so strong, as to render any attack or expectation of recovering it totally improbable, and too absurd to be entertained even in idea; which, while, it answered the double purposes of keeping Sir Henry Clinton in check, and thereby straitening him in his quarters, rendered the communications between New - York and Europe, to the southward and the West - Indies, totally infecure and hazardous, at the best very precarious. But what had our army done ? loft a good man, and sent a gallant officer to be hanged, and in return reeeived a yery bad man in exchange, whole services or fidelity could not with safety be relied on. Ministers had boasted, in their specch from the throne, of the victorious feats of Lord Cornwallis, and of our success in ' Georgia and the Carolinas—he saw no such great cause for exultation on that account, though

. i our

A. 1781. DEBATES.

our officers had undoubtedly behaved well. He was convinced, that the state of New - York, and its vicinities, hemmed in oh all fides, as the commander in chief was, more. than counterbalanced any advantages obtained in the Carolinas. : In the Well - Indies, our situation was surely much worfe lhan. it had been last year. By lending Admiral Rodney to touch at Gibraltar with his four Blips, instead of fending him directly to the Well - Indies, a good opportunity had been loll, and the French had time given them to put their, islands into a better condition than they were in the laffc year; though during the greater part of the last campaign we were mailers of the West - Indian seas, yet nothing had been effected. In Europe we had but one ally, and by our own mismanagement we had contrived to lofe that ally. He alluded to Portugal, and meant todescribe her as the only ally that had Ihiewn any delire to serve us; and how had we loft her ? by moll unwarrantably prefuming to make the port of Lilbon a neutral port, a fta - tion and a place for fitting out {hips .; nay, a kind of naval arsenal, a matter unheard of before, " and contrary to the law of nations ! By such conduct it was that we had now no port in Europe but England, and were confined to our own ifland. At the fame time we had added to the neutral powers in confederacy, and by that means strengthened; the hands of our enemies, for certainly the neutral powers having armed in confederacy was an advantage on the fide of our enemies and a great disadvantage on our fide; as we had thereby, in a great degree, beeri deprived, and, ' he feared, if the armed neutrality should be finally agreed upon, totally deprived our - selves of all the natural arid acquired advantages hitherto derived from our situation between the northern and southern powers of Europe, and our acknowledged dominion in the narrow seas : because all the supplies, at leaft much the greater part, necessary to the fitting out and maintaining. the French and Spanish navy, would be obliged to pass eight months of the year through our Channel; but if the objects of the armed neutrality should be obtained, neither our natural situation nor ancient claims would or could avail; for, he prefumed, the noble Earl at the head of the Admiralty was not prepared to say, that he was ready to wage war with all Europe. His Grace begged their Lordships to consider these things, and to look also at the ruined trade of the country. There it was he meant, to lay his finger, and on that he should. hinge the proposal he designed to offer to their

Lord -

PARLIAMENTARY A. 17 %

Lordships, for the reception and consideration of which, he had taken the liberty to move. that they might be summoned, ' "The trade of Great Britain had suffered beyond all hiftory in the course of the last summer. On the 9th of August no lefs than. fifty - two ships captured at once, and among them five East. Indiamen, and many richly laden for the Well - Indies ! Let their Lordships connder the importance of that lofs—let them recolle£t, that it might coll this country twenty millions of money; because, from the nature of the stores, the ufefulnefs of the articles with which that fleet was freighted, "and the1. great value of the whole capture, France and Spain might bej enabled to continue the war another year, and God knew how much longer. That fleet had, contrary to wifdora, contrary to every necessary caution, been suffered to touch at Madeira, when it was well known that the combined fleets of the House of Bourbon were llationed at Cadiz, and wait - ing to make the bell of any opportunity that might offer of enriching themselves at our expence. This circumstance it was that he meant particularly to call their Lordships atten tion to, and to inflitute an enquiry, that the House might know to whom it was imputable, that this, fleet failed under - so flight a convoy, and who ^ it was that directed the Com modore to come in so close with Gape St. Vincent; and why, at a period of such imminent danger, that fleet failed in the track for Madeira, or if it was indispensibiy necessary that the fleet should touch at Madeira, why it was not convoyed across by the wellern Iquadron all the latitudes till it passed Cape St. Vincents ? It therefore appeared to him, on the whole consideration of the Hate of naval operations, as well ©ffenfive as defensive, as well to protest our own property, as to annoy our enemies, that our grand fleet, then in the Bay, under the command of Admiral Geary, could not have rendered any service to its conntry, so great or acccpt - ablt, as that of convoying our fleet out of the probable track of 1; formidable enemy, from whom in the extent of the ocean they were spread over, it was impossible to escape, under the prefumed directions the commodore a£led; for moll clearly, if Captain Moutray did not act under specific inllrudtions, respecting the course marked out for him, he had been mucl to blame. ——He believed that Captain. Moutray had acted under specific inllrudlions, and that was the principal objefi of his present motion. — - His Grace observed, that it had beet customary, in the case of public disasters, such as he had beet alluding to, to propofe enquiries into the causes which operat -

A. 1786; D E BATE S; a <

ed,. in producing a calamity of this alarming, extensive, arid he feared fatal, nature, arid thereby le ' arrij whether anyblame was due to thofevvho had given j or executed the orders, concerning the famei—He trusted the House felt the ' propriety, ' justice, and necellity of instituting such an enquiry. ——He was himself perfectly perfuaded of ' it dnd urider that perfua - fion, begged leave to submit to their Lordships, the following motion, and that merely, as blariie was imputable some - where, that their : Lprdship % and the nation iriight know who it was, or was not, that ought to stand responfible to Parliament and people, for the loss of one of the most valuable outward - bound trade fleets that ever failed from the harbours of England Considered merely in respect of property; but when the nature of the property was taken into the account that it contained naval and other stores designed fot the ufe and protection of our West - India iflands our fqua - drons i n that quarter of the globe and our other distarit dependencies; ithat it weakened orir marine and land operations, or had rathertotally suspended them till replaced and that this invaluable property had fallen into the hands of an enemy to be employed against us, the magnitude of the loss was such as to exceed his powers of computation —His Grace concluded a ihort, but spirited and well conceived speech, with moving

u That an humble address be. presented to his Majesty, that he will be graciously pleased to give directions that there may be laid before this House copies of the orders and instructions given to Captain John Moutray, of his Majesty’s ship Ramillies, in July or August last, respecting his taking under his command a number of merchant ships bound ' tP the East and West - Indies, and other parts, so far as relates to Captain Mou tray’s being directed to go to the ifland of Madeira, or respecting his J > eing particularly cautioned to ufe his utnioft endeavours to avoid failing in such a traCt as might rifque his falling in with the enemy’s fleet; ”

And also, 66 A copy of Captain Moutray’s letter to the board of Admiralty, giving an account of the capture of a great part of the merchant ships under his care, on the 9th of August last. ”

The Earl of Sandwich in reply rofe, and said, so far Earl of was he. from having the lmallcft objection to the present mo~Sandv > Kh ' tion, that he begged leave to second it. He thought the House and the public were entitled to have the fulleft satis - faCtion, respecting the loss of so very important and valuable a fleet as that to which the nobl& Duke had alluded, and - Vol. I, E therefore

P A $ ? L iAM E N T AIR Y A. 17So.

itherefaterin : order to : throw the greater light ujpon that affair. Be Wbuld; with the - leave bf the Hqiife, move ah ' addition to the noble Duke’s motion; and call for a paper which in his. opinion ^ would afflft ih ’ aterially in convincing their,. Lord - dMps - that it, hadrnotibeen; 0Wing to any inegletf : 6f his, that ib :. Fatal an, accident had ' happened; on ' the contrary, previous to the fleets ’ ” failings orders had Been Terit but to Admiral - Geary, to give them evety prbteCHbn ' the exigencies bf the fervioe might admit of ^ ' and iiithe pferfbftaiahbfe - of thht ' duty; to frifqoe. i battle - with the enemy, however flaperior '; thit every. infbrmation Ministers received. Captain Moutray was in pofleflidn of; and as to fending but a ftrdhger convoy, merely for the purpose of protecting the trade Beet; it w ' ouTdTiiave been extremely wrong, for either it fhbuld be ‘fuch a force as was able to cope ' with ' Don Cordova *, or the noble Duke, muff confess, that fending out a smaller ' force, in the Cafe it fhbuld, be met by the enemy, would be pnly 3evorting it; When the news of the accident arrived; he did affhtfc ' their EbrdfMps, no mah in the kingdom ’ felt giieater sorrow thah he did; neither; was any irianmore eonleidus of the Value of the; fleet, captured ' and of - its great importance under c : eVbfy eohffderation; : asu ' ipfccrfiof - t - lris rifbfe ' than ordinary - ' case was taken ' to guard ugairift an accident, which it was not; ' ai it afterwards appeared; - in human wifdoin1 to prevent. ’ The noble Duke hudTaid, Jthat a flioft time ^ revio ' us ' to the fleets ’ failirig. for England it ! was knowri - that the combined ' ’ Abets were at Cadri, ’ and that they meantffoo ' & ’ tcf fail ' fronx thatpdri '; this, was. very true, - - and in corifequence of rthat; khoWh ledge; Admiral; Geary - had beenfent out with all ' tB ^ ' TOps, that werd ready at thb time, with exp refs inffru&ibhs - - fbited to the dccasion. After he had failed a sufficient : timb;; to render it most probable that the great - fleets of merchantmen fb, r; the Eaff and Weff - Indies might fail Withthe utrnoft - safety, those fleets were suffered - to fail; bndfurely if eVer thfefe : was a moment when it was ' most wife and prudent ' to truJPar - valuable fleet of merchantmen to sea, it was when the grbat ' fleet of England was out; arid out with '; the - express order ‘to clear the passage. Nor was the safety bf the fleet trusted.. merely to this chance, though according to comttidn observation, it ‘might without rafhnefs have been considered as a safe venture. At first it was imagined that a few frigates would be a fufli - cient convoy, but on a fepond thought that was over - ruled, and theRamili. es, ary4 gun ship, and the only ship of the line then ready, was dispatched with - them -. The care of the - - I - Admiralty

4

' m e b : at/tt e; s. a

Admiralty. did, noJt eyen ^ flop t - hpj ^ f - bui - whil ^ thei - rfleet ' lay windy - bound, two rnorerfail of;. the; line, the Brothee and the B. ienfaifant, one q£ which returned to; Corke and vthe other parted company, w, erp got ready and; added. to the convoy ;,; lb that the fleet failed at last under, the protection of - three {flips of the line and three two and thirty :; guh frigates, a convoy much stronger than had ever been known to be sent : oh such an OGcasion, ^ efgeqially when die - fweft6rnr. fquadson ! was,. at sea,; He was very, happy that the ' noble Duke h, ad moved; for the instru ^ ions,. beoapfewhen they should be ., produced ' he made no doubt bu t they, would tend to a full - exculpation of the Admiralty Ijoard,; It was enough for that officer that h© had met the convoy and kept company with it tilt the 2d. of August, off Cape Sr ', Vincents, the very latitude the noble Duke had described, and it could hardly be. prefumed, that - if Admiral Geary, thought it necessary, that he Would have neglected to accompany it further. Commodore Johnstone fell likewise in with Captain Moutray, and informed him that when he left Lisbon an account had been received there that the combined fleet was failed, so that taking the conduct of the Admiralty. Board in any light, either in, i efpe£t of the instructions under which Captain Ivloutray failed and Admiral Geary acted, or in respect of subsequent events, no blame could be juftly imputed to the Board atVhich he had the honour to preside.

The noble Duke had laid great stress on. the fleets having been permitted to fail in the track for Madeira,. with an intention to touch at that Island, and had alked, why that was suffered would tell the noble Duke ' why—because the

merchants, who owned the, fleet and the jships cargoes, had expreffiy defiredit; bepause it was thence forward a necessary place ' of destination, an essential part of the business of the fleet being to touch at Madeira and take wine on board, s With regard to their going or not going to Madeira, the House must lee, that it. was a matter of perfect indifference to the Admir ralty; they had no concern in the freights of theships; all their connexion with the transaftion was merely to convoy the fleet to the place of its destination, agreeable to the requeffc of the merchants, and with such a convoy as was most likely to ensure the fleet a secure passage.. The noble Duke had hinted that it was known the Spanish squadron had been lying, in wait for this fleet. The noble Duke was miftaken, and nothing could prove this more strongly, than the Spanish Admiral’s letter to his own court, which had been intercepted,

E 2 an$

P A R L I A M £ NT ARY A. 1789,

and in which that commander expressed his extreme surprize at having fallen in with the fleet, declaring that : < s nothing could have been farther from his expeditions. ” Another thing he rouft take notice of, which the noble E ) uke had observed, and that was, that the fleet ought to have had a stronger convoy; ——here he must again differ in opinion from his Grace. The convoy he had already Hated was unusually strong, besides the additional expectation of safety arising from the circumstance of the weftern squadron being at sea, for the purpose of intercepting the fleets of France and Spain. And, when it was considered, that the fleetf was captured by so great a force, their Lordships would fee, that, great as the calamity was, it was not to be avoided by any convoy, however strong, unless the weftern fejuadron had failed as convoy.

The, Admiralty could not poflibly judge for Captain Mou -, tray in all given situations; he had every information already stated under ail the circumstances he had now mentioned, and as for the rest, the Captain was ' left to act agreeably to his own judgment, upon events as they might arise. ——He would, as he said, when he first rofe, move for another paper; the paper which he meant to call for, was so much of a letter from Admiral Geary, dated at sea, the 2d of August ', as related to his falling in with the Ramifies and her convoy, bound to theWeft - Indies, which would fhevv the House clearly, what the probability of danger was, ori the day the letter was dated, and whether every poflible precaution Ir ^ d not been used, that human wifdom could suggest. Before he moved for that paper, hisJLordship said, it might be necessary for him to observe, that the nobleDuke had gone pretty much at large into a general review of the state of affairs— he Ihpujd not follow the noble Duke into that subje£t, and the reason why he would not, was, because he did not think the present was the proper time for it; it might come on as a topic of dif - cufiion hereafter; one matter, however, he must take notice of, and that was, the noble Duke’s complaint that Admiral Rodney had gone to Gibraltar with his ships, in his way to the West - Indies; here he must differ with the noble Duke exceedingly—fo far from considering this a matter deferring censure, he was astonished tp hear it spoken of in the language of complaint. In consequence of that circumstance taking place, we ' had taken and destroyed onte entire Spanish tleef, ' conflfting of fix of their ships of the line, adding ievefai of them to our own marine, dispersed and routed another,

A. DEBATES. Sm -

other, ' and cflfe&ually thieved Gibraltar, Gibraltar, their Lordships would consider, could only be relieved by a powerful fleet; and surely, if the merits of any planwereto. be judged of by eyents, there could not have been a more wife, nor a more glorious plan for this country, than that of fending Sir George Rodney to the relief of Gibraltar. Having said this, his Lordship declared, that he should only remark, in answer to all that the noble Duke had let fall in descrip - tion of our future profpe&s, that they did not strike him in the fame gloomy point of view; the situation of affairs was undoubtedly critical, but he law no manner of reason for despair. His Lordship concluded with moving, > '

That an extract from the letter of Admiral Geary, of the gd of August, 178a, to Philip Stephens, Esq; as far as relates to his failing in with the Ramillies and her convoy, bound to the West Indies, be laid before this House. ”

The Duke of Bolton role to reply, and after thanking the Duke of noble Earl, for having, not only seconded the motion, but moved for an additional paper, that he believed _ wo. uld materially contribute to clear up the matter, respefling which he thought an enquiry highly necessary, said the noble Earl had miftaken him in one point, - —he had not complained of the convoy being too small, considering that the fleet of England was out, he had only meant, that had not that been the case, it ought to have been stronger, and he still thought Admiral Geary should have had instruflions to have stretched across the latitudes of Cape St. Vincent, and seen the East and West - India fleets clear of1 the land, knowing, as Admiral Geary must have done, that the combined fleets were to fail from the port of Cadiz, and knowing also, as every sea - 1 man must know, that a strong wind from the north - west quarter frequently blew, with the current, which in ' that case sets in strongly, would consequently force the convoy to the eastward, and as it really turned out, drive it into the very mouth of the enemy. It was no rule, he said, bedause it had been usual for West India fleets to touch at Madeira in time of peace, that they should do so in the midft of sum - mer, when we were at war with France and Spain, and when we knew that it was highly probable the combined fleets would cruise in the track to Madeira - New situations required new customsj. and he called upon the noble Lord to declare, whether he had not frequently iigned orders for convoys going with West - India fleets, which were not to touch

v ' £ 3 ' v at

\

$ % '. PARLUM E N T ' ARY. Ak, 1780,

at Madeira ? The noble Earl said, die merchants liad deli reel that the f ^ eet might touch ' at" ' Madeira % &y. hacl, to be fare it was a justification of die Admiralty, bpt it was rather extraordinary to him, to hear that they had, because the merchants ' who had converted with him upon. the ful ^ eft, had all found great saul twith the convoy’s having been fufFere ' d to fail with an intention to touch at Madeira. The noble Lord said, ' that Geary had a powerful squadron under his command, he had so, and therefore the Admiralty were the - more to blame.. « —But ' suppoling that tl > e noble Earl did not think it prudent to fend our great force too far to the foutlryvard and thereby neg ! e. £t the home defence, the noble, Lord had no apology, when he knew it was not in his power, confident with the national safety, to protect die, convoy by force of arms, to negleft that species of continual protection within his reach, he meant sinking out such a track and such longitudes as would

O O ;

have kept it clear of the land, and consequently clear of dan -

.. gci -. r

When the noble Lord said, that the merchants would have - this, and the merchants would have that, he held a language which, so far as it went, proved hini totally ignorant of his duty, and unacquainted with die nature of his office. —; — ? - It was abiurd to suppote, allowing the fad to be exactly as the noble Earl had stated it, that the merchants, whole property - the grrateft part of the convoy was, would rufh headlong on their own ruin. It was to the lafic degree prepollerous, to even prelume it, and it Was in every respefi : incredible. H. e was ready to grant, that in point of convenience, and in fever ral other reipeefcs,. the merchants would have been dellrous to have the convoy touch at Madeira; but under what idea ? — That was the - point, and the only one, which tended to re ^ veal the truth. —Moll certainly, on the idea that the weftern squadron, being then out, such operations, and such a plan for a naval summer campaign had been determined upon, as either to compel the enemy to remain in port, or if they tlurit have ventured out, as would have led to an engagement, and mote. probably terminate in vi. &ory,

Earf of The Earl of Sandwich rofe again and said, that the track Sandwich, choten was at the earnete requete of the merchants, who in fified on the necefhry of the convoy touching at Madeira; the lois was therefore their own, it was no concern of the Admiralty, —The noble Duke wifiled to know, if the Admiralty Board had not frequently ligned orders for convoys bound for the West - Indies,; in which no ' direction or ljbefty

‘was

A. 1780. DEBATES.

was given. to touch at Madei ' ra in their way. - —He oftfeti had, and prefumed he Would ‘ ' but. ' the ' choice relied with the

merchants, - afed rthfe; orders :. ufijritly % ere ' founded ' jori their re - - quifition,; whrethe ! r the frhckVas that Of Madeira *; or a more weftern longitude. ~It was always ufuai for one of the annual fleets, at ' le&fiy - to touch at ' that ifland. —1 he wine which that illarid produced made part of‘their cargo, and it was, he believed, well urid ' erftbod both ' in Great Britain and the West - Indies ^ thdt wine ivas at once a neceflfary and profitable part of the venture in all voyages of this kind.

The Duke of Bolton’s motion was then put, - with Lord Sandwich V amendment, arid agreed to without any oppofi - tion.

November 17.,

Atone o ’ clddky the Earl o fp o m fret, attended by the Governor of the Tower, came to one of the coffee - houses inOld - Palace - yard, where his Lordship continued till the fitting of thb House of Peers '; he was then condribted to the chamber belonging, to the Ufher of the Black Rod, and at a little paft three, his Lordship went to the bar of the House, conduced ' by the Governor and Sir Francis Molineux. ' As soon as Lord Pbififret ‘got to the bar, the Lord Chancellor; spoke. as Char. k follows" : ' _ cellar•

‘6. ‘My Lord, ’ ’ ’

tc The ' House has commanded me to express the jufl : offence arid ' displerifure which the Lords have conceived, at the heinous infulr which you have committed upon the dignity. and privilege of this House, in the person of a Peer, by lending to the Dukri of Grafton the letters which have been read; wherein are Contained expreilions most unworthy and unfit to be used by a person of honour, unto a person of the like quality : : And I am further commanded, by order, of this House, to give you this folernn and severe reprimand for the fame. But in consideration of the submission contained in the humble petition, which you presented to this House on Monday - l ' aft, the Lords ' are content to remit your further punishment, upon your making such acknowledgment and submission to the House, and entering solemnly, and upon your honour, into such engagement as this House hath thought fit to order, and prelcribe for that purpose. ”

Earl Pomfret being then taken from the bar, and admitted to his feat in ' the body - of the House, spoke as follows : '

6 < JyJy

P A R L I AM PTA R; Y A < 2786. :

; « : My Lords,.

I felt the most lincere concert sit. having merited the difpteafure of your Lordships, by fending to the Duke of Grafton, a Peer of this House, the rafh and unadvised letters which have given your Lordships so much and so just offence, for which I most humbly alk pardon of this most honourable House : they were dictated by the lulpicion of an affront, which lam now convinced his Grace did not offer I do here promife solemnlv, and upon my honour, that I will not further pursue any measure of violence against the person ' of the Duke of Grafton, or against any other person, upon the account of such suspicion, or of any thing that hath passed upon this occasion. ”. /

His Lordship, having made this submission, was ordered to be discharged out of custody, upon paying his fees '

November 21.

This day the following papers were laid before the House, - having been moved for by the Duke of Bolton.

No. I.

By the Commissioners for executing the Office of hard High Ad miral of Great Britain and Irelandf tsfc.

c Whereas we have ordered Captain. Garnir, comuiander of h is Majesty’s ship Southampton, now at Spithead, to take under his convoy the live East - India ships, whole names are in the margin, together with the vi&uallers Hilfborough, and storeships, named in the inclosed lift, or Jldountftuarty such of them, as may he arrived at Spithead;. Royal Gecrge > and also the trade bound to the West - Indies, Qodfrey, and any other vi&uallers and storeships bound

Gatton; and thither, as may be ready to fail, and then put -. 18 victuallers, ting to sea, with the very first opportunity of Jloreships ^ and wind and weather, to proceed down the Chan - transports, as nel, fending the Thetis, which we have put. specified in the under his command, a - head,. to inform you of original. his approach, and upon your joining him, to

follow your orders for his further proceedings. You are hereby required, and direfled, to hold ypurlelf in constant readinefs, to put out in the 111 ip you command, when the Southampton makes her appearance in the offing,. and taking her, and the Thetis, under your command, and - the East - India Company’s ships, with the vi&uallers, storeships, and trade abovementioned, under your convoy, put to sea, and proceed with them, as expeditioully as possible, consistent

A. 1780/ D E B A T E. S.

with their security, towards the places, of their destination, touching at the island of Madeira, and taking in there, - without a ' moment’s loss of time such. wine as may, be neceflCary for the companies of the said ftlips under your command; and then make the best of your way off Carlisle Bay, in the ifland of Barbadoes, seeing the East India Company’s ships in safety, as far as your way and theirs lie together. ", ' v 6 Upon your arrival off Barbadoes, you are to leave there the trade bound to that island and Tobago, and pufethe victuallers and storeships, laden with provisions and stores, for the ule of his Majesty’s land and - sea forces, upon the Leeward Island ' station, under the charge of Captain Linzee of the Thetis, directing him to proceed with them. to St. ., Lucia ^ or wherever else his Majesty’s fleet and army may. be; and, upon joining Sir. George Rodney or the commanding officer, for. the time being, of his Majesty’s ftlips on the above mentioned station, to deliver the inclosed pacquet, bearing his ad - dress, and put yourself under his command, and follow his orders for his further proceedings.

i Having made thiis arrangement, you are to proceed in the ship you command, accompanied by the Southampton, to Jamaica, with such of the yi£luallers, ftpreships,. and trade under your convoy, as may be deftinedto that place or Peri - facola; seeing, in your - way, the trade bound to Antigua, Nevis,. Montferat, and St. Christopher ’ s, in safety to those iflands respe£iively. .. And when you arrive off the east end of Jamaica, detaching the.. Southampton,, with the trade bound to the ports on the north fide, of it, with direfripns to her captain to follow you to Port Royal, to which place you are to proceed, without a moment’s loss of titne ^ with the Ramifies, and the remainder of your convoy, putting yourself, and directing the captain, of the Southampton to put himself under the command of Sir P. Parker, or the commanding officer,. for the time being, of his, Majesty’s ships off Jamaica, and follow his orders for your further proceeding. -,.

4 And, whereas. the Arwin galley, one of the store - ships named in the aforementioned lift, isTaden with tents and camp equipage, for the troops in the Leeward, Hlands, you are, in pursuance of the King’s. pleasure, signified to, ' us, by Lord George Germain, one of his Majesty’s principal Secretaries of State, to pay particular attention to her, and direct the captain of the Thetis to do the like, and fee her to St.

. - Vofy I. ... F. Lucia,

PARtliMENTARY A. 1780,

L. hcia, bf wherfeV. er. t ^ ktmy may be, - without one moment’s Id&dfthne. -

4 Giren under our Hahds the 14thday bfThly, i ) 8o. ( Sighed ) ‘ 1 ' SANDWICH,

;, J. BULLER,

Cdpt. fiTbutray, Ctifa ' faiinder LISBURNE ?

of his Jfafejlfs ship Ra~ failies, Ply ' motitb \ :

By ebfnfiiahd of their Lordfhrps.

s PHIL; STEPHENS.

;. : No. II.

■ By thb Commijiondrsy &c. & ' c,

4 Whereas we think : fit, that his Majesty’s ships named in the margin, together with the inflexible, if she at - ' Buffalo, fivbs at Spithead rn time, shall accotnpany you 100 Jjltarm, ICagUeS to the weftwardof Scilly, for the greater fe -

. ‘c ' urity of the East India ships, ' viEluhllers, jloreships, irartfpcriS ) and trade under your convoy, and We have given di - re£tions accordingly to Captain Cotton, of the Buffalo, noW at Spithead; you are therefore heteby required and directed, in addition ' to ohr oYder of yesterday’s date, to take the Taid Captain Cotton, and thof ? ships under your command, for the greater security of the convoy, until you get the above distance to the Westward of Scilly accordingly; and then you are to make the iignal for them to separate, and tb. put in execution such further orders as the said ^ aptaitt ’ C. iytfon has received from iis.

4 ' Giv6h : bh the 15th of July, 1 ^ 80. - : ' v

( Si&ftd ) SANDWICH,

lisburne ;

•. ^. R. mann. *

Captdin ' JtfdUtriay, Cominah ' dir '

of his fAi ^ tJlfs ship Ra - : £

failles, - P - lyfnotith ■; ' ’ *

■ v ' - ' 77No. Hr .; '

Extrafl of a letter from F. Geary,, Esq\ Vice Advitiral of the, ’ ' PVMtei ? €sfe. ! to ‘Philip Stiffens, Esq\ ' Secretary to the Right Hon. ‘ihe‘Lords1 Cothmiffoners of the Adtniruliy; dated at sea,

fbrulr fhi& morning, '. tfieadvanb ^ ship ' of - i&e fqnadson jmafle ', u£nal F6r a fleet On the lee - bovif, which proved to be his Majesty V fhi ^ s ! the Ramifies, Inflexible, Buffalo, Alarm, Thetis,; and Southampton, with flveEafflndia ' ships, and a lar ^ e ^ onvoy for the West Indies : and as Captain Moutray’s orders were, to take the Inflexible, Buffalo, and Alarm, 100

leagues1

I " ”

I A tjBoi ~ £ > E B ’ A T E S,

| leagues to the Westward of Scilly,; apd the ( fquadrom under my command being then. 92 leagued from that place ;, ' andas it was a cpnvoy of great conjeqvience, J thought it my. duty for : their better feenrity ' to fee - them ' that ' di ^ aocej. - which > 1 had; done at one o ’ clock, - Scilly then bearing; 54 idift i ta; - leagues; and then theRamilies, Thetis, and Southampton, and convoy, parted company, with a fipo freifi wind at N. N. E. ’ -. .. .. v -

No. - ‘ ' - :

Copy of a Utter from Capt. John Jiftnitray, Commander of his Majesty s ship R&miliesy to Philip Stephen ' s, Esqi dated at feet,

c I am sorry to acquaint you, - for the ' information of their

Lprdships, that. this morning at. one o ? fclock, being. i{n ' the latitude of 36 54,. N. and longitude 15, 00, weft. of Ton - don, I percei ved the lights of a fleet which; ! judged w. ere those of the enemy; upon which I •immediately made the lig - nal for the convoy, to bring to on the ftarbord tack : at half. paft one made the signal. to make fail after lying to, and keep close to the wind, which was at : N. N.. E. till day light

I theft found it ( necessary; to make the signal for the, convoy tp difperfej finding to my utter astonishment three flags *.. and tjje greatest part of, the combined fleet in chace of them, and ft ve. p line of battle ships and a frigate well up in th, e iWake of the Ramtllies, Southampton ., apd Thetis, ;,; but.. by. dint of failingfthe, y happily escaped : a great number of the iconyoy in a ftiort time after struck, and ! have. the greateftre. afon in the world to believe,. the greatest part of them must unavoidably be taken, as a number of ships was firing at them. - f; In. confukation with the Captains; Garnier and iLjneee,

Ihave difpatehed Capt. Linzee in, the Thetis, beings thebeft : laiior, With this, unfortunate. account to their ! Lqrdmips. ‘

4 If I can weather the fleet, Ifhafi proceed off Madeira to the place of, rendezvous to take from, the nee the fh ' ips. that may hav. e. escaped, : as frigates : will, io ° doubt be sent to interr. ce. ptthem, the enemy having taken several ships that had the; sealed rendezvous.

! I have the ihonor to be, &c _.

| ( Signed ) JOHN MOUTRAY. ’

I November 22. ' / ■

The D. uke of Bolton gave notice, that as no hufinefs wasDufee expe£led to edme. on. before. the tecefs, previous to his making tan ' the motion for daying before their Lorflships theinftruftions

F 2 given

s

1

36 PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

given by"the Admiralty Board to Capt. Mdutray, in confer quehce of which, were the question to be taken up at present, there would be a very thin attendance, he took the opportunity of informing the House, that he would defer his intended motion till. early after the Christmas recefs.

On the 27th of November the House adjourned to the 25th of January, 1781.

January 25, 1781. tori Star - Lord Stormont rofe, and informed their Lordships, that he tnonU was charged with the delivery of a melTage from his Majesty, which he offered in the ufu < ? l form. The meflage was accordingly read, and was conceived in the following terms

“ George R.

“ ! His M ajesty judged it. proper to acquaint the House of Lordsy that - during the recefs of Parliament, he has been in - dispensably obliged to direct letters of marque and general reprifals to be issued against the States - General of the United j Provinces, and their subjects.

; iC Thecaufes and motives of his Majesty’s conduct on this occasion are set forth in his public declaration, which he has ordered to be laid before the House. '

‘‘ His Majesty has with the utmost relu&ance been induced to take an hoftile measure against a state, whole alliance; with this kingdom stood not only on the faith of ancient treaties, but dn the soundest principles of good policy;. His Majesty has used every endeavour to prevail on the States - General to return to a line of conduct ^ conformable to those principles, to the tenor of their engagements, and to the common and natural interests of both nations, and has left nothing untried to preventy if possible,; the present rupture ;

. ‘‘ His Majesty is fully perfuaded that the justice and ne « cefllty. df ' the measures he has taken will be acknowledged by all the world. Relying therefore on the prote&ion of Divine Providence, and the zealous and affe&ioriate support of his people ^ his Majesty has the firmest confidence, that by a vigorous exertion of the spiritand resources of the nation, he ihali be able to maintain the honour and dignity of hiscrown, and the rights and interests of his people, against all his enemies, and to bring them to liften to equitable terms of peace. ”

G, R”

His Lordship likewise presented several state - papers, eight '. in number, consisting Of, the memorials, presented within the

last eighteen months by Sir Joseph Y orke, his Majesty’s am - baftador - extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the States Ger

■. : - neqtl

37 :

A; 1781. DEBATES.

neral of the Seven United Provinces. The deputy clerk of the crown having read all but the last; when he came to this last number, which was a copy of a treaty of commerce, to be agreed upon between the States General of the United Provinces and the United Independent States of America, entered into on the behalf of the United Provinces, by the grand pensionary of Amsterdam, VanBerkel, and on that of the United Stares of America, by Mr. John Lee, executed at Breda, and dated September 1778—bis Lordship being at the table, laid in a low voice to the clerk, “ You need not read any part but the first and two last articles. ” The clerk accordingly proceeded.

His Lordship was riling to make his intended motion, when the Duke of Richmond role, and asked if the papers now readp, ^, f contained all the information the nohle Viscount proposed to Richmond lay before the House ? Until he was satisfied on that head, it was impossible for him to know how to conduct himself. His Majesty now made a communuation to the House, of amea - sure which he thought fit 10 adopt during the parliamentary recefs. He ordered certain papers to accompany that communication, which, however necessary in themselves, were imperfelb Before therefore any further step was taken, he wished to know from the noble Viscount, whether those papers contained the whole of what was intended to be communicated ? ’

Lord Stormont remained silent. His Grace observed, that the papers on the table contained only a partial account; that nothing appeared concerning the motives and reasons which influenced the conduct : of the States General; consequently, nothing which could be relied on. For his own part, he should ever prefer n; > account to a partial one. He wished, ' at this particular crisis, to fltrengthen the hands of government as much as poflible; but the duty which he owed to his sovereign, his country, and himself, forbid him to approve of measures which, under the lemblance of wil ' d ora, equity and vigour, might prove big with ruin, mischief and : injustice. Perceiving that the noble Viscount seemed disinclined to give any answer; if the House was to - trust to the impeffelf, garbled ' information now before it, he should at leaft take care, that,. such as it was, the House fhou ’ d behr it. The noble Viscount, when the clerk read the title of Number 8, delired him to read it short. He acquiesced, in hopes that other materials, if called for, would be given; but the noble Lord’s silence not - having indicated any. such intention, he would infift to have number 8 read at length.

The

3 «

The Uri ChavctUtr,

Dokeof

JLicbtKGKtlt

P A R L I A M E NT A1 Y < :, A. 17 1 ;

The Lord Chancellor laid that it was of very little eonfe - quence, he believed, whether the paper alluded to was read short or long. The title of itfully imported its contents. It was ! a treaty between the States General of the {even United Provinces, and the United States of America ^ as they termed them - leIves. sThe intimation given to the clerk by the noble V i f - count was no aft of the House. It was a propoikion made by the noble Lord to save time and unnecessary trouble, and was merely acquielced in - by connivance; for without doubt, in the ordinary course of proceeding, the noble Duke had a right, if he thought. proper, to desire the paper to be read verbatim.

It was not to be expected that the noble Viscount could give an answer. His Majesty had charged him with the d. eTt livery of the mefiage, and of the fevera ! papers that accompanied it, which was the information intended to be given. They were sufficient, in his opinion, though there were no other document. The raanifeflo included in the Hate pa ? *, pers fully juflified the measure. It ffatedthat treaty which was the subject of the present conversation; a treaty expressly entered into between an ancient sally and our own rebel subjects. It would have been criminal and perfidious in any power in a Hate of common amity with us; it was doubly lb coming from an ally; and what, ' if possible, aggravated the conduct of the States General,. and gave it ftiU a deeper complexion, it was lecretly carried on at a time when we were in a state of actual alliance and profeffed friendship : yet, though there were no other objection to what bad been urged by the noble Duke, there was enough to fortify, him in his opinion of the impropriety, or rather informality, of entertaining any other question or confide rati on whatever, till his Majesty’s meffoge fhouldbefirffdisposed of "

The Duke of Richmond rofe with some w. arjnth, and la -, mented the, situation every noble Lord, flood, in who ' differed from miuiffers. They had every thing to contend with, and that without the most distant proipeft of success. They were certain to be over - borne, by numbers 5 and besides. the evil flowing from bad measures, which, they were bound to tfeel in common wi th others, - they ' suffered the further - mortification of having their efforts imputed to improper ' - motives; hut while he was conscious that he acted upon right motives, he would prefer his duty to every otker consider. ation, andeh - counter whatever difficulties might ffand in the way.

. • -.. The

A. 178 *. DEBATES 39

The noble and learned Lord talked of acquiescence and connivance respe < Sting the reading the paper marked No. 8, short. For his part, if ministers detefmined. to withhold all other information but the partial extracts on the table, he would neither acquiesce nor connive at the short reading proposed; if their LordJhips were to give a sanction to the present measure, in a manner, in the dark,, he would for - one infift that No. 8 be read at full length. It was all their Lordships had to guide and lead - them through this myfterioiis and unaccountable business, and he was determined that he would at lead make the experiment of learning whether or. no the paper contains any thing which should render it more clear and satisfactory ? If not, he should most certainly move for all the information or proceedings in this business; and as he foresaw he should, as usual, be out - voted by a great majority, he would take an opportunity of tefiify ing, by a protest, Signed - with his name, his disapprobation of a war, which, for aught that yet appeared, had been wantonly commenced, and might be ' productive of the most fatal consequences.

The deputy clerk of the crown then proceeded to read the treaty or paper marked No. 8, which was very long; as soon. as it was finished, Lord Stormont and the Duke of Richmond presented themselves at the fame instant to the wool - lack, and after a short pause his Grace was permitted to go on.

He said, he felt the most earnest deftre that the proceedings Duke of and deliberations of the present day might be accompanied Rubmorj. r with unanimity. He was aware of the ., very disagreeable predicament in which he flood. He foresaw the event of any opposition he, could make i and that every thing suggested at that fide of the House, would be over - ruled. He knew, like - wife, that the present measure was a popular one. He was not \ ignorant of the imputations ' which would be thrown out on whoever opp. ofed it in any form, or upon any ground; but not even all this, his earnest wish for unanimity, his being overborne by numbers, or any other circumstance allud - sed to, should deter him from a faithful and conscientious jdischarge of his duty. Upon that - single principle he had I always determined, and ever would act; and notwithstand -; ing the various discouragemets he should have to encounter 1 With, he would nevertheless steadily perfevere. He had hoped,

[ at the outlet of this business, that ievery paper or communication necessary for their Lordships ’ full information would be paid before the - House; but from what. already passed, he was Convinced that nothing was more vain and idle than such an I - expecta -

c4o PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

expectation. Ministers had previously determined there should not, and that experience had proved, beyond doubt, was sufficient even in the moil sanguine mind to banish all hopes of success.

He had long lince determined to absent himself from any attendance in that House, and he believed this - would be the last time he should ever trouble them upon any thing which immediately related to the conduCt of government in respect of the American war. Be that - as it may the present occasion was, in his opinion, clearly out or the question He confessed he was much astonished to learn, by what fell from the noble Lord on the woolfack, that it was the intention of ministers that the decilion of that day muff be taken from a few partial extraCts from the instructions given to the British minister at the Hague, the manifefto formed upon those extracts, and a project or pretended treaty between Van Berkel and Mr. Lee.

Such being the conduCt of ministers, he was reluChmtly forced to seek other and more relative information. Though entertaining no profpect of success, it would afford him an opportunity of declaring his sentiments to the public, and entering the reasons which ihduced him to oppofe the measure now intended in the manner and on the grounds on whifch it was meant to oppofe it, on their Lordships ’ journals. As soon therefore as the noble Viscount should move an adT dress, in answer to the King ' s meflage, he intended to move an amendment for the production of the whole of the correspondence, or for copies of all memorials, instructions, answers, &c. which had passed between the British cabinet and the States - General of the united provinces.

Lord Star - Lord Stormont then rofe, and said, that however willing he might be to address their Lordships in relation to the royal meflage with which he was charged, and in answer to which it was his intention to move an address, he waited with plea - ' sure till the noble Duke who spoke last had explained his intentions, as he always did when his Grace had any thing ta communicate to the House, no person being better informed, nor. more capable of treating with ability every question which came under his Lordship’s consideration.

As to the defe&ivenefs of the information objected to by the noble Duke, he little thought that any such objection would have been started; and as to moving for papers, till the meflage was disposed of, he believed it would be a proceeding altogether unprecedented and unusual, Whatever i. .. the

■ A. i ? 8t. 7 D I B ' A T fc ' &.

the : judgment. of the House hereafter might be, he under stood, thkt the viweflage was always previously determined upon, ias a - matter. of course. v

HisLordfhipthen proceeded to shew, from the papers, that the measure ’ of iffiiing letters of marque and reprilals, was not only justifiable,. but was founded in neceffity arid found policy.. The; States - General had behaved basely arid treache - roufly : connected by the most solemn alliances; united by ties the most sacred and indifloluble; bound by common iri - terest, and urged by motives of rnutual preservation, we had nothing : apparently to fear from. theiri; —‘we had, on the contrary, every thing to expect which afffiftion, cemented by a mutuality and reciprocity of interest and advantage, could promife, and honour and fidelity could exactc, 1

But in all these expectations we had been miferably difap - pointed, and basely deceived, The States - General had violated their most sacred engagements; they had a£ted as secret enemies; and what was worfe, they carried on those secret machinations under the colour of friendship. ~They had entered into a conspiracy with our natural enemies and rebel subjects, to difmemher the British empire, and to parcel out our dominions. This would be base and unworthy even from a neutral power; but when it came from a pretended ally, and an avowed friend, it deserved public execration; it stamped the nation who could be guilty of it with infamy and ignominy, and called aloud for the most exemplary chaftiTement. / /

The papers on the table, considering the ancient treaties. subsisting between the two nations, established the truth of every thing which he had affirmed, and would justify remarks of frill greater severity. He would pass over the singular obligations for which the republic stood indebted to this coun - ' try. He. would only rest his arguments upon plain fa£ts, collected either from the terms of existing treaties, or the consequent coridu6b of the States - General.

By the treaty of 1674, it was true, the States - General were permitted to carry indiscrimirtately all goods, commodities, and merchandize whatever to our enemies, as well as friends and neutrals; but by the two subsequerit treaties of 1678, and 1716, it was specially provided, that when either power Should fee attacked in any of their dominions, that the other, upon the casus foederis ^ Shall. assist with a certain number of troops and Ships. By this it was plain that the subsequent treaty, at a certain period, at leaft, supersedes the treaty of 1674; that is, after the requisition made by the Vol. X G party

4 *

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

party attacked, to his ally, and the assistance given in consequence of that requisition, which the treaty provides shall be at the end of two months from the date of the demand. Upon thei ' e plain/ notorious facts, how then will the case Hand ? Mod; certainly, that the treaty of 1674 is rendered of none effect by the two latter treaties of 1678 and 17. 16; for surely it would be the moil absurd, contradidlory, and nugatory construdlion poftibly conceivable, to suppose, after the requisition made, the quotas granted, and actual hoftilities commenced, that the mips of Great Britain, or the republic, taking the event either way, should trade and carry on a commerce with France or Spain, or any other power, which either, and of course, both after a certain period mu ft be at war with; it was repugnant to the most familiar rules of common sense and common experience. Either the treaty of 1674 ceases to operate the very, instant the casus foederis begins to exist, or both cease; or, if possible, a greater absurdity would take place, that of the treaty of 1674 being always binding on the contradling parties, and the treaties of 1678 and 1716 never binding upon either.

He would rely on the judgment of their Lordships, whether by fair construdlion this was not the spirit, as well as letter of the treaties alluded to; and if after application made, and the expiration of the interim between the application and the performance of the condition, was not the very instant in which the subsequent condition was to take place, and to supercede the precedent one, in relation to the liberty of supplying the enemy with military stores, as included in the general and unqualified description of all goods, merchandizes, &c.

But even to wave this point, and relinquifh every advantage which might be drawn from it in favour of Great Britain, it would be not improper to state the transadlion in point of fact. 1

What did the republic wifli to obtain by this exclusive liberty, so contrary to the law of nations, as that of supplying the enemy with the means of carrying on the war ? The fad was limply this : the Dutch claimed the right of supplying the enemy; it is, say they, a commercial transadtion, the mere objedb of gain; let then their Lordships look upon it even in that light. Neither the republic, nor any of their subjects fullered any detriment as merchants or common carriers; for the bottom or ship, when vessels laden with military stores were seized, were liberated; and if the property

was

A. ^ 81. D EB A T E S.

was Dutch, a reasonableand fair price was given as an equivalent to the owner : if, on the other hand, the cargo belonged to an enemy, it was confiscated, and condemned as legal prize; in neither case was the spirit of the treaty of 1674 violated. The treaty never meant nor expressed in any way that Dutch bottoms were to protect the goods of an enemy, nor any more than that Dutch property, though designed for the ufe of an enemy, should not be condemned as lawful prize in our Admiralty Courts.

After having endeavoured to prove, by a great variety of collateral arguments, that we had not departed from the treaty of 16 4, considering it as a distinct engagement; that the casus foederis began to exist as soon as the time limited for performing the terms of the requilition was expired; suppofing even that we had broke one treaty, and were not of courle entitled to claim the succours from Holland; yet in that event, the conduct of Holland amounted to an unprovoked aggrefiion, on their part, so long as they continued to conceal their treacherous intentions, under the fair appeal ance of friendship and alliance. It was true, the treaty, or the contents of the paper signed. No. 8. was a secret transaction, as to the mode of conducing it; but it was avowed in its objefl, and spe - cific and direct in its consequences : it originated in treachery, and was open, direct, arid premeditated, intended to be carried into execution at l ' ome given or eventual period. It was making war upon this country, and was a species of aggrefiion every way correspondent in its nature to an avowed aft of hoftility. It was a treaty with a part of our subjects in open rebellion, and called into question, as all other offenfive acts do, our undoubted rights and loyereign dominion over a part of our own territories.

His Lordship next entered into the detail of the conduct of the States General, respecting either their direct refuting to give any satisfabtion, or by their evading to give any by flu - died plaulibilities, pretended impediments, and artful delays, originating from a fixed fyflerri of procrafti nation; observing, that they had either trifled with our Minifler, treated his re - monftrances with neglect, or denied all kind of iatisfaflio ' n. He did not wish to be underflood as involving the whole of the United Provinces in the fame general charge; their councils were, unhappily for the body of the people, influenced by faction, and by partial interefl. They were pnder the dominion of a Gallo - dimeric an faction, and the people were Peduccd and led away from their real, interefls, through the arts and machinations of selfish and ambitious men. He should ever

G 2 condemn

0

4f PARLIAM EN T A1Y A. 1781.

f. ondemn any policy which had not justice and good faith for its balis; because ' the contrary seldom failed of bringing after it its own punishment, honesty he would ever maintain was the best policy, and moral rectitude Ibould ever be received by him as a teft of the wifdom, as well as justice, of those kingdom ' s or states, which made it the rule or balls of their public conduct. He had no doubt but the time would shortly arrive, when the people of Holland, now infatuated, or ruled by a Gallo - Jmerican faction, would perceive their error, - and punish the authors of their misfortunes in a manner luitable to their de - icrts. It was, in his opinion, astonishing, how they could be lb far {educed; or how they could sacrifice the first principles of prudence and policy to the imaginary and fanciful expectations of interested or ipeculative men. He was per - luaded, that this infatuation, besides not being prevalent among the body of the people, was far from ? being universal, even among the governing powers. The true friends of their country looked upon their interests in another view; it was indeed impossible that it could be otherwise. Every wife Hoi - : lander must fee at once, that Great Britain was the only real ally and casual prote&or of the republic against the ambitious designs of her powerful neighbours : such a man must acknowledge, that if the power and consequence of Great Britain should be broken, or diminished, according to the evident schemes of her enemies, that the ruin or conquest of his own country could only be suspended, or deferred, till some of the great powers of Europe should think proper to do so, and none more likely than that power of whom his country had ever juftly retained the best founded jealoulies and apprehensions, and wholeSuperiority would be the natural result of the fall of Great Britain : in Ihort, good faith, mutual interest, and mutual preservation, extension of commerce, ancient alliance, affection, and every other circumstance which can bind or connect nations together", served to Ihew the blind as well as wicked policy of entering into a conspiracy with our rebellious lubje£b, and with their natural enemies, determined and meditating equally their own destruction with ours.

If that illuftrious General, the Duke of Marlborough, or. that immortal hero, the Prince of Orange, the great champion and defender of our liberties, were now alive, he Woul4 fubmitto their greatest admirers, whether they would not adopt a limilar policy to that which dictated the present measure ? Whether the latter, as Prince of Orange, would not have strained every nerve, and made every effort in Kis power \n order to break and disconcert the dangerous leagiie entered

A. 1781. DEBATES. 4

into by the House of Bourbon; whether, as; Prince of Orangey he had seen Great Britain in its present situation, he would - not immediately perceive the downfall and destruction of his own country involvrd in that of Britain ? And, finally, as King of Great Britain, he would not rifque every thing soon - er than fubiriit to the pride, inlblenqe; and wicked ambition < of France and her unnatural confederates

His Lordship was proceeding to explain the condu&of Van Berkel ' j the grand pensionary, when he was called to; order by the Duke of Richmond.

The Duke of Richmond rofe, he said, to speak to order, Duke of which lie was well warranted to do, as the noble Lord whomRtebmn m he now interrupted had manifeftly transgressed the established rtiles of debate. The noble. Lord, in the course of his - speech, instead of confining himself to the subject matter of the melfage, in answer to which he had proposed an address, and the paperswhich accompanied it, argued from prefumptive fails, totally unfounded, in respect of the necessary evidence required on l ’ uch occasions in that House. This would be extremely improper and irregular, in any one of their Lord - ships, but was doubly reprehenfible in the noble Viscount, who, from the high poll he occupied in his Majesty’s Government, as well as the opportunities he had of learning the most early and secret information; carried with it peculiar weight, and of course made a suitable impression on those who heard him.

If the noble Lord had any information on the subje£l, on which he spoke with so much confidence, he must have gathered it from common report, or through the channel of office; if the former, it would be indecent to argue upon it in the character of a confidential servant of the Crown; if the latter, it. was his duty to lay his information, and the authority whence he derived it, before their. Lordships.

There was one idea that pervaded the whole of his Lord - ship’s speech, which seemed to him extremely erroneous, and was the only ground on which the manifeflo or mefTage, in his opinion, could stand; that was, considering the rough draught of a projeft or plan to be agreed to by the Seven United Provinces, and the United States of America, as an original paper binding upon the respective parties. This, it ' was clear, was a mere projedl ! indeed the tenor of the paper, as well as the concluding article, expressly proved it, for it fays, to be entered into by the parties mentioned. Van Berkel and Mr, Lee, the acknowledged subjects of two independent ' 1 ' states

iS, PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

Rates, ilceitch out a plan of a future treaty to be acceded to by. those Rates. To give this plan effect, the consent of both those Hates mull be procured; but after a period of more than two years, so far from there being any ratification of this ideal treaty, there is not a ferap of paper, nor a lingle proof, of ’ any kind whatever, that either of the prefumed principals in this transaction ever heard a syllable relative to the negotiation or pretended treaty, much lefs that they had approved, of it; yet the treaty is made the only ground of Nullification of those who advised the issuing the manifello, and fending the present mefiage.

His Grace, after some further observations of the fame tendency, concluded with affirming, that the noble Lord had. deviated from the established rules of parliamentary proceeding, when he called him to order, and repeated his intention of moving for : the whole correspondence, as soon as his Lord - ship had concluded his speech.

Ld. Ster - Lord Stormont said he was far from acquiescing in the rule nont. laid down by the noble Duke, as binding upon the members of that House; that no fa£l was to be Hated, or opinion formed, but upon information regularly in possession of the House. If there was such a rule, daily experience proved that it had not been observed, or indeed at all attended to by the noble Lords who generally spoke from that part of the House in which the nofile Duke fat. He believed a conduct the very reverfe of this was almoH uniformly pursued; reports and hearfays were frequently substituted for fails; and conclusions were drawn, and arguments raised, as if they had been in full proof; and repeated accusations urged, apparently ill - founded, at the time, or which had proved so afterwards. None of their Lordships more earneHly wished than he, that the regularity of their proceedings should be preserved, nor none felt more sensibly whenever they were violated; which, he was free to say, too often happened to be the case. He indeed remembered a period ( at the time he first : had the honour of a feat in that House ) when its proceedings were conduced with gravity and dignity. It was not however the case at present.

He observed, that the noble Duke fought a species of information which was publicly known. The Dutch Gazettes were full of the motives which direfled the conduct of the States General. After the moH pressing entreaties and repeated condescensions on our part, when the paper which the noble Duke so warmly contended ought not to be considered as an act of the republic, because it appeared to be no more than a projefl or plan of a treaty —when this paper was laid 1 by

A. 1781. 7D :. E B ATE S. '

by our ambassador before the ' States General, instead of difa - vowing it, they only disclaimed having any knowledge of it in general terms; and when ah opening was given to them to disclaim t : he aft, they declined to avail themselves, and came to a determination to refuse any satisfaction, and disposed of : it ad referendum, to be taken up, or not, at fomc future opportunity.

If this was not an avowal of the treaty or project, it : was clearly little short of it; and for his part he could fee scarce any difference between a public aft of the state, and a private aft of an hoftile nature committed by a subject, when the governing part of that, state denied satisfaction, or refufed topu - nifh the offender.

His Lord ship next stated the several stages of the progrefs of this business, as confirmed by the papers referred to thfcir Lordships; and contended that the States General had acted more unfriendly and substantially hoftile to us than our natural enemies the French; for although the latter, for some time before they publicly declared themselves, had. been fe - cretly assisting our enemies with military stores, by conniving at the private engagements entered into by their merchants, and permitting fbme military adventurers to go into the rebel service; yet when complaints were made on the subject, and remonftrances repeated, they were not always made without effect. This illicit commerce was frequently suspended, if not totally flopped, by specific orders from court; the cargoes relanded in some instances, and the failing of the vessels countermanded in others. This was the conduct of a rival and inimical power, whereas not one of the remonftrances presented by the British minister at the Hague was in theleaft attended to The noble Duke, called for the counter corre - spondence, or the answers of the States General to those several remonftrances. It refrelhed his memory, and helped him to give the noble Duke an answer to his asking what was the reason that none of the papers respecting the, conduct of die States General, as stated by themselves, were laid on the table ? He could satisfy his Grace by saying there were none for the States General declined, under various pretences, to give any satisfaction whatever.

The consequence of all this was, that the Dutch, by being considered as friends and allies, " it being their interest to be considered in that character, injured us daily in the most tender part, and that more effectuaily than if they had actually declared publicly against us : their open enmity could not have

done

PAR L I A M E N T A R Y A. 1781.

doneu& the tenth part of the mischief. They suppliedouf own > subje£tsin open rebellion with all the means of resistance, - And he was perfuaded, upon the best information, that we lliould never have beendn our. present situation, were; it our good fortune that St. Euftatia had been destroyed, : or funk in - the ocean. France, at the period alluded to, had no. inter - xourfe with America, and when. she began to have an. inter - CoUrfq with her, it was by Health, and was far from affording out rebel subjects an assistance adequate to their wants;. while ^ Holland, by making - her West India poifessions the mart for our American subjects, furnished them with the means of - continuing the rebellion, till France, and afterwards Spain, took a public part in the quarrel.

' > His Lordship qbfer ' ved, that his Majesty; a£ted with all. pof - fible1 tendernefs, wifhingto avoid any thing. which could ad - mimfter the most distant cause of offence, or be the means of embroiling those whom he wished to consider as his friends and allies, in any measures which might in their consequences involve them in a war with France. Though by the treaty. of 1678 as he observed when he was. last : up, we were au - - thorifed to call upon them within two months after any attack made on us, to declare war against that power, or to demand the succours prescribed by that treaty, of troops anti ships, according as choice or convenience might suggest; yet on the - aggression of Franee we forbore to inftft upon the performance of that treaty; nor did we apply for those succours till France, with Spain and America, had confederated for our destrutSrion. Nevertheless now, at the end of eighteen months, after so many repeated applications, in the chara&eri at one time of neutrals, at the other as allies, could the ! States General be induced togive satisfa£lion ? so far from it, that they not only continued to supply our foreign enemies ! with military stores, but our own subjects, in actual rebellion; ! which was no lefs contrary to the law of nations ^ and the in - 1 terpretation put upon the treaty of 1674 by themselves, than ! the first principles of justice, which bind nations not in a Hates of actual hoftility to each other. - ’ I

. It was very unnecessary to trouble their Lordships further ! in detail ^ the present treaty, happily found in Mr. Laurens’s papers, only confirmed what was sufficiently apparent before, that treaty furnished a key, which deciphered their whole conduct; and if the leaft ambiguity remained, the answer ol the States General to the British minister last December, putil beyond all question. They had proved themselves ourmdlj

a; 178 *. 7 O E ! B A T ' E :

♦ ., * f \ “ fafal enemies, ' b ' ec ' ause they were ' eonc ' ealed. The ' French *

oft the contrary, ' - "entered later into the conspiracy, and declared earlier; /eoHfequ ' ently they ' a ’ Cted ' fairer, and proved lefs dangerous. ' ' The republic of Holland acted the part of ari"&f - ' faffing wh9 ' ftrikfes ', Shd stabs in the dark, with a douib ’ re prof - peCtbf Tuccefs ^ nd impunity; and We had treated ‘that perfidious people‘as they deserved, - and as he would treat an‘af - faflin, if personally attacked; for had he arrested; the blow, and seized the hand that gave it, he would drag the villain - to the light, arid Avhen he was satisfied that he was the real •offender, he would infliCt the punishment which was due to so atrocious a crime. "•

He qualified his expressions, as ' not applying to the - people ‘of Holland in their collective capacity, attributing it chiefly to the effects of party, and the bold and interested vieWs of a Gallo - American faClion, bribed by lucre and ufurious gain; but he ' trusted % it ' h ' confidence, that, be the cause what" it might, the spirifed1 and vigorous exertions of this ' country would convince them of their error, and make them repent of their perfidy. We had very wifely determined not to procraf - - tinate any longer - - we had given them the first blow, ' and ' wbuld probably fturi; them into their senses. : On the - other hahd, if we had continued to put up with further evasions and studied delays; ’ we should thereby have only enabled them to effect by open force what they had hitherto attempted to accomplish by treachery and concealment. This ' was by no means founded in conjecture; their conduit bespoke their intention; for while they were endeavouring to amuse - us, and ' at the fame time continuing to refuse giving us the leaft - satisfac - tion, they were actually making preparations for a state ' of hof - tility, a further evidence rthat they were meditating on the mean ' s of maintaining - by open force, when the moment should arrive, in which all attempts of further concealment, they foresaw, would prove impracticable. 1

He depended much on the magnanimity of the nation, 7and the happy opportunity which his Majesty’s measures gave of crushing the evil, before it arose to a dangerous degree; —The Dutch were not yet in a state of preparation to effe£t‘the pernicious schemes they had formed and he made no doubt but one or other of the following events would be the confec uehcc; which was all that Great Britain aimed at either the people of ' Holland, from repeated Ioffes and misfortunes, wohld compel their governors to aCtwith justic ’ e, ' and ' fulfil the existing treaties; or that we should be able in a very Voi.. I. ' H short :

so

PARLIAMENTARY A 1781.

short time, by pursuing ourpresent plan ofhoftility with vigour and effect, to render that republic of no avail or service ^ to; the hoftile confederacy; the former was/by much the more probable : loftfes, defeat and difappolntment, if no other ' motives should operate, would beget, munnur and discontent among the subjects of the republic; they would loon difcp - ver that they had. much to loie, and not the most distant pro - spe£t of gain; their commerce would be. annihilated, or suspended; they would, tremble for the fate of their distant possessions; in short, they would be enemies at all events, secret or open; and, he believed, there was not a noble Lord that heard him who could for a moment helitate upon ' a choice. For these general reasons, founded in the inequivocal appearances he had mentioned, he was clearly of opinion, that the faffs stated in themanifefto, thus authenticated by the papers on the table, contained. the most amplejuftification of the propriety, found policy, and just ice of the measure communi1 - cated to their Lordships in his Majesty’s mefTage, in answer to which, he begged leave to move the following address - :

“ Most gracious Sovereign,

€i We, your Majesty’s most dutiful and loyal subjecb the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament aftethbled, beg leave to return your Majesty our humble thanks for your most gracious meflage, and for having been plealed to communicate to this House your Majesty’s public. declaration, setting /pith the causes and motives which have obliged your Majesty to clireft letters of marque and general reprifals to be issued against the States General of the United Provinces, and their subjects. - -

£C We observe, with much concern and just indignation, that the governing part of a nation, whom the ties of common interest, and the faith of mutual engagements, should have made a sincere friend, has employed the most hoftile and pernicious means to annoy an ancient ally, by leaguing with your Majesty’s revolted subjects, and furnishing constant and effectual aids to your inveterate enemies.

c We acknowledge, with the highest fati ^ faction, and warmeft sentiments of gratitude, your Majesty’s wifdom, in endeavouring to bring the States General back to those principles, which they have deferred, and in the reluctance you have fhevvn to proceed to hoftile measures against a state connected with this country by the deleft ties of mutual interest. Your Majesty’s great; moderation and forbearance strongly

aggravate

5 *

Ai 1781. DEBATES.

aggrayate their conduct, which made the present rupture in - dispensably neccessary.

u. We beg leave to a flu re your Majesty, that we shall, with the warmeft and most dutiful zeal, give every support to those vigorous meaiures which your Majesty has determined to pursue. We are fenlible they are founded in justice and vvifdom, and are such as the honour of your Majesty’s crown, and the essential interests of the nation, require. ”

The Lord Chancellor came from ( the wool lack to his place.

He laid, he would be obliged to put the question as moved by Ci, 7, ee“iri the noble duke : he therefore begged to say a few words, in observation to what had fallen from the noble Lord, when he was last up. He always spoke with great diffidence, when he differed from the noble Duke; and if at any time he thought he saw qause not only to differ from the noble Duke, but likewise a neceflity of speaking in strong terms of difappro - bation, he should wish to entirely reprefs his sentiments, because he would be led to believe, if any improper expression came from his Grace, it had been inadvertently spoken. Guided therefore by this rule, he should ever avoid general accusa - tions, or personal charges, direct or recriminatory; and ab - stain as much as poflible, even in the heat of debate, from any thing which, out of that House, could not stand the teft of that kind of language and personal respect, which was due from one gentleman to another. Fully perfuaded of the propriety of fq conducing himself, he heard with much uneaii - nefs some charges made against the advisers of the present measure; for, though in point of form, matters of state were supposed to originate with the Sovereign personally, he was free to acknowledge that his Majesty’s ministers, or advisers, were alpne constitutionally responflble for the consequences.

This, however, did not make any difference as to the mode of parliamentary proceeding, in the first instance, which, he believed, uniformly declared, that when the Crown made any communication to Parliament, either from the throne, or by meflage, the speech or meflage was immediately ^ aken, : into consideration, previous to the difeuiflon of any other business *

For his part, he thought the papers on the table. contained every necessary proof to justify the measure : but if they, had nor, the order of their Lordships ’ proceedings would nor ^ in his opinion, admit of any new matter being introduced, till the meflage was first dil ' posed of ^ '

On this, ground he clearly concei ved that - the noble Duke’s intended motion amounted to a direct negative, or, as the

H 2 nc5blct

puke of

noble Duke hadannounced it, to the poftponing the addrefsby way of a previous question. ' Taking it in either light, he rofe chiefly toadvertise their Lordships, that it struck him as such, and that he should consider it in that. light.

Another error, as he conceived, the noble Duke had fallen, ' into, was, that if the House agreed to the nddrefs moved by the noble Viscount, such an assent would bind their Lordships, and preclude all further enquiry and difeuflion. He could never assent to this conclusion, because he thought the whole business, or any part of it, was as open tb ' rcconflderation hereafter, as if no such motion had been ever made or carried J and it was only on this idea that the noble puke could take tip the question as he did; for certainly, if the case was such as his Grace understood it to be, that their Lordships were to be for ever precluded by the vote of this evening, there would be good ground for deliring further information by such of their Lordships as should think that already laid before them was not sufficient.

The noble Duke seemed to lay great stress on the circum - stance, that the treaty was no more than a projefL There would be some weight in this argument, if an opportunity had not been given to the States Genera ! to rctra& or dilavow j it; infteacl of that, their conduct amounted nearly, if not en - i tirely, to an avowal or approbation of its contents; they poll - j poned it ad referendum, and by so doing, they difcl aimed it in j form, but acknowledged it in substance; for though he would ] allow, for argument’s fake, that they were not prepared im - j mediately to punish the offender, Van Berkcl, they might i have satisfied the British court, by reprobating it in an ab - straft resolution, or opinion, expreflibg in general terms their i total disapprobation, and declaring the impropriety or crimi xiality of any of the subjects of the republic entering into a i treaty with the rebellious subjects of another state, in amity and I alliance with them. After some further observations, which he i explained more at large when he came to speakto the question, { his Lordship having received the Duke Richmond’s motion, : rpad it. It was in substance as follows : 5

ie That an humble address be presented to his Majesty,; that copies of all memoriaL, remonftrances, &c. which have J been presented or received to or from the States General of ' the United Provinces, ftnee September 1778, be laid before; that House. ”

The Duke of Richmond then rofe, and laid, he had not heard7 a Angle reason assigned for withholding the whole of the cor ]

respondence

S3

A. 1781. DEBATES.

respondence between the I - rihiTi Cabinet and the States Ge - n < > il, which did nut serve to fortify him in his first opinion, th / it ought to bo laid before that House, in order to enable their Lordships to come to a decision founded in justice anti good policy. The only information their Lordships had to ground any vote upon was worfc than none, because it was partial. The noble Viscount said, in argument, there was none; if that could be depended upon, his motion could carry nothing with ir; it would be a mere non - entity; if productive of no good, neither could it do any harm. The noble Lord on the wo. olfack, for whose abilities and candour he entertained a very high respefi, said, the motion implied a negative. Ho begged pardon for differing from the learned Lord, but lie though ' otherwise; for it imported no more than this, that the King, with the advice of iiis mi Millers, issued the manifcfto, which contained the motives of their conduct. Now, in his opinion, the fair inference was this, - that the manifefio was issued upon the evidence contained in the papers, or it was not; if it was, be, for one, did not think, that the evidence of the intentions of the States General was such asto jaflify hostilities on our part; conferjuemiy, that other evidence was necessary, which, if not produced, as he had no expc&ation it would; in that case only it was, that his motion imported a negative to that made by the noble Viscount for an address.

The noble and learned Lord had infilled, that the poll - poning the complaint again# Van Bcrkcl ad referendum, and refilling to punish him, amounted to an avowal of the act with which the pensionary was charged; this was a reasoning he could never adopt. It ' was novel in itfclf, and of the first impression. It ’ was well known, that the forms of deliberation and proceeding, and the nature of the Dutch constitution, were tedious arid intricate. The latter was composed of various movements, and though he did not pretend to speak with accuracy or precifion on the subject, it was more than probable, that the States General were by no means empowered to give an explicit and precife answer on a subject of which all, or infinitely the greater part, of their constituents muit have been ignorant. It was doubtful even whether a power of punishment was veiled in the States General '; but even if such a power was veiled in them, their wonted caution and deliberate mode of proceeding fully jollified their condus#; and he would appeal to every noble Lord who heard him, i£ there were not innumerable possible cases in which a iubjecc of this country might offend again# the 1 aw of nations, not -

withstanding

PARLIAMENTARY A. t7St.

Wifhstanding which his punishment, instead of being taken up by the sovereign power of the Hate, must be delegated to our judicial orcriminal tribunals; yet he fancied it would be deemed a most ablurd condu£l, by any power aggrieved, that a refusal on our part to violate the laws by with - holding inflant and exemplary punishment should be deemed an aggression sufficient to justify hoftilities against us by the complaining party.

Another point, much infilled on by the noble Lords who Supported the address, was, that the projefl, or plan, mark - ' ed No. VIII. - was considered by them as a treaty made between the States - General of the United Provinces and the United States of America. Nothing could be more repugnant to the truth. It could never be considered in that light; for at most it was no more than a plan, or project, conditional in its frame, and, as experience has since proved, nugatory in its consequences. It never was a treaty; it never was authenticated even as a project or treaty in embryo, within the knowledge and consent of the respective principals : nor had since, so long as from September 1778, to this very day, been confirmed or recognifed : lb that if he had no other objection to the measure, as justified and explained by the manifeflo, or the mefTage in consequence of it, that alone would be a sufficient reason for him to refuse his assent; for although no person entertained an higher personal respect for, his Majesty than he did, nor could be farther from imputing any thing improper to him, he contended, that his ministers had made him assevt a faifehood jn that part of the manifeflo where his Majesty is made to lay, that the governing power in Holland had entered into a treaty with his Majesty’s rebellious subjects in America.

After endeavouring to shew that the above was not only a forced constru£tion, but a downright faifehood, he lamented in very warm terms, the alarming, nay, perilous situation of this country, which was driven into a contest with the three most formidable maritime powers of Europe; and, in all probability, if the prevailing reports were to be depended upon, there would shortly be added a fourth; —but, Mini - fters Teemed determined to rifqueall; they were grown def - perate, and by -. driving every thing to extremity, vainly imagined, that in the midft of furro. unding calamity,, and national distress, ' their crimes or ignorance would be forgotten, or overlooked. They had the modefty to preach up unanimity, and to claim confidence ., when almost; every succeedr. ing day afforded some fresh instance of their fatal ignorance

A. 1781. E > E B A T E S.

and mifchievous incapacity. The noble Lord over the way, after his repeated boastings, had, either through ignorance or breach of promile, suffered. the dominion of the lea to be surrendered up to our rival enemies, and, byway, of shewing our ( Irength to contend with a third, had confidently avoided an encounter with even one of them ( ingle - handed.

The noble Lord in the green ribbon, while be refufed to give any further information to their Lordships than the partial extracts on the table, acknowledged the exigence of other information in one part of his speech, though he denied it in another. He referred their Lordships to the Dutch - Gazettes. This was a language he never before heard used in Parliament, it was indeed treating their Lord - ships with a degree of haughtinefs or contempt almost : intolerable. He ventured to say, that there were some of their Lordships who never read a Dutch Gazette, and nfany who did, attended very little to the contents; but be that as it may, it was a species of information he never expected to hear gravely recommended to the great council of the na - tion by a minister in high office, and in great trull and confidence with his Sovereign, —to perufe the Dutch Gazettes as the only document necessary to enable them to advise their Sovereign, - when called upon by him, at a most critical and important period. The noble Viscount referred their Lord - ships to a foutce of information to which, it was probable, he never resorted himself; for he prefumed he was like his uncle, who never read a newspaper—no, never ! —This contemptuous treatment was difficult to be borne. He knew it was in vain to oppole it, or seek redrefs. .. The people were infatuated; the nation was led blindfolded; and where any opposition or ( land was made against those pernicious and i destru&ive measures, corruption - came in and fvvept every, thing before it, and, by its irrefiflible effects, set truth and I justice at defiance.

!, The noble Lord in the green ribbon had dealt in the mar - I yellous as well; as the improbable; he was bold in figure, and j extravagant in metaphor; he had, indeed, used one some ^

S what out of the common road, which he should not. have j been much surprised to hear from the mouth of his brothet Secretary [ meaning Lord HilKborough, ' and alluding to his j being an irilbtman ]; he had recommended vigorous mea - ! lures, and predicted their good effects, one of which was, that, they ' would be the means {e offunning ' the Hollanders into thtir. fenfts”, It was, he confefTed,. a curious method of I bringing

55

P A R L I A ME NTARY - A.. 178 !.

bringing people to their recolle&ion, by first depriving them of all sense and memory; but lie would not quarrel with the iimile, though he doiibtech the justice of its application. It was evident, however, that this language wns calculated to answer certain temporary - puvpofcs, to delude ' the people with false hopes, and prevent them from refiecting feriously, and of directing their attention to the reality of their lituation.

His Grace spoke to a great variety of mifcellaneous matter, which afterwards underwent a more full : and - detailed dif - cuflion, and gave several intimations, in ' tlib ' course of his ipeedi, that as lae perceived all endeavours to ’ serve this country *. which he looked upon as devoted vvererin vain, he was determined for one ' to discontinue henceforward a mortifying and unavailing opposition. - •, 1 : r -

Earl rofe and laid, lie was much aftotiiftied how

iburj}. any noble Lord could enfertain the leaft doubt of the fecVet intentions of the States - General, or, being frttisfied of tliofe intentions, could : hefiiate even fora moment about coming to a decifton. It was very unneceiTary, he believed, to ' eridea - vour todemonstrate what muff be acquiclced; : in : as soon as mentioned, that the States - General either did ^ or did not know of ' the intrigues of Van BerkeU : If they ' vyere acquainted with the transadlion relative to the private treaty executed between the penlionary and Mr, - Lee, - and had not taken. the aiecelfary steps to •undeceive our" rebellious subjects, by passing a censure upon their own ’ subjects, ' who had thus traitefouily taken upon them to - confederate, not only for themselves, but the governing powers ' of the7 country, or Irate; or being totally ignorant of : what paffes between the contracting parties, till informed by the British miniiler in the month of December : last, when they poftponed, a ' d refereyi - dum, the consideration of the complaint fl - ated ' byXaid mini -. fter; their conduct in his opinion, in either event, ' - amounted to a justiiication of what had been secretly approved of, or connived at by them, or what being transacted without their. knowledge, as soon as it was made public, met ' with their hearty approbation.. ‘

His Lordship observed, that he had heard now with much indignation, a repetition of the fame language - which had so often given such just cause of offence to every real friend to his country; and which in his ford he ' believed, beftdes the particular personal offence ' it "gave those whbfe conduct j and senti. ments were so uhjuftly and indecently" traduced, haS j - been productive of the worst; consequences - in relpe£t of so - •; - reign

A. 178L ' DEB A - I4 E Si HI

reign powers. : Oar councils were described to be weak or wicked; our riatidnal ( late of defence totally inadequate to operations offenfive or deftnfive; our finances exhausted, and, in short, every thing was urged that might by its irri - prefiion or tendency iriviie the attacks of our declared enemies fllake or render our alliances of none effe£l, or create a dil ’ regard and contempt in those Hates, which were deemed merely neutral.

When his Majesty, by the advice of his ministers, and approbation of his two Houses of Parliament, had adopted any measures in iupport of the dignity of his crown, the rights of Parliament, and the preservation of his kingdoms, those rtleafurds were arraigned in the most indecent. terms; and when every other means of obstructing and defeating them failed, then it was the language of some noble Lords to predict national ruin, and to affirm that it was effected by the ihfluence of corruption, or a£U of ministerial imposition.

This was what lie would never endure, or pals by in silence ^ aS long as die should have the honour of a feat in that House; it being evidently the language of falsehood and disappointed ambition; it could only originate in the worst motives, and tleferved the tefentment of the public at large, as well as their Lord 111 ips, every one of whom, who continued to support the measures Of government, being" involved in the general ac - cufation. Was it possible to fit in that House, day after day, without Feeling the strongeft emotions of well - founded indignation. —To hear the conduff, of not only the noble Lords to whom his Majesty had entrusted the direction of his affairs basely and unjuftly vilified, and their characters; scandalouily and indecently traduced; —charged with being j wicked at one time, and incapable at another, or both, ac - i cording, as it corresponded with - the views, or answered the purposes of their accusers; —as having entered into a con - i spiracy against the liberties of their country, and leagued j for its destruction, but even every one of their Lordships I who supported the measures ministers recommended. ~To fiate those accusations was sufficient, for they contained in themselves their own refutation, and that they were no lefs malicious than ill - founded. He had for a long leries of years lerved his sovereign in several Capacities, and he could lav his hand on his heart, and with truth affirm, that - he always a£ted for the good of his country, to the belt of liis abilities i

I. and that there was nothing the crown - had to bellow could induce him to give a vote contrary to his conscience, or declare against what teemed to him to be the real interest Vql. I. I of

^ 8 PARLIAMENTARY A; 1781,

of his country. If. he was not very opulent, he had sufficient to put him above the poor temptations of place and emolument : and he could in his coni ' cience add, that he be - - lieved there was not a tingle noble Lord who, heard, him,. - and that had supported the measures so indecently asserted to have been carried through by the mere force of corruption, who did not a £1 from motives equally honourable and con - feientious with himself.

But it was plain whence all this arose; it arose from a wicked ambition; a lull of power and dominion; a third : after - the emoluments of office. It fpnang from corruption, and the worst species of corruption, because it was incurable—“ a corruption of the heart. ’ 7 Measures were to be of - posed, because they were said to be the King’s measures. Ministers were to be traduced, because they were ministers l they were vilified and envied on account of their situation, Opposition proceeded upon hopes formed of compelling mini - fters to rehgn; but what was worfe thanall, —than even personal perlecution, or public accusation, the dearest interests of the country were sacrificed to eftecl the completion of those pernicious fcliemes. He trailed, however, that the good sense of the nation had learned to trace the motives of such a conduct to their source; to fee that it flowed from party rage, which is ever known to be the result of political delpair and factious difnppointment.

Puke of The Duke of Richmond mftantly. rofe, and observed, that

Ri. - Lmc - J. there was no great difficulty in making a general and particular application of what had just fallen from the noble Earl. It was directed a gain ft those who had, from the; commencement of the present wicked, unnatural, and ruinous war with America, opposed the measures which gave it birth, and continued to the present minute to oppofe and reprobate it in every ft age of its fatal progrefs. It was particular,. as perfo - nally applying to himself, for having imputed the perfevering in a war, equally impolitic and unjuft, to the power and irreiiitible influence of corruption. He assured the noble Earl, with all - his warmth and eloquence, he had not convinced him of the contrary in either reipedl. He was ft ill satisfied, j that the war, if continued to be prosecuted against America, ! mull inevitably terminate in the destruction of this country; and he was equally convinced, though he was far from Hating it - as a matter applying indiferiminately to all, or perhaps to any v ? ry considerable part of those who countenanced the : present ruinous measures, that between two parties, thinking indifferently and impartially 021 the fame subject, the balance had been weighed down by the means of corruption.

The

A. 1781. DEBATE S ;

The noble Lord, with all those loud and warm profedions of the dihnterefted motives on which he had a died dnce he became a servant of the crown, and that energetic eulogium pronounced by himself on his own public virtue, laid down one general proportion; “ that opposition to the ineafures of government are always founded in party and fadtious motives; that failing to ouft the administration for the time being, begets rage and disappointment; and these again beget personal enmity, malice, and ill - will. ” He was ready to take his Lordship’s word for every syllable of the doctrine so far as it applied to himself. There was a period, and perhaps a long and the moll : valuable period of his Lordship’s life, when he was known to be in strong opposition to the measures of the court. His Lordship, it might be fairly prefumed, now spoke as he once felt; he spoke from long experience. The druggie was tedious and mortifying, full of disappointment, and clouded with despair. No man, therefore, was a better judge of the various operations of the human mind under such circunidances; and so far as he retained ' a recolledlion of what passed in his own— it was scarcely to be doubted; it was fair to conclude, that a wicked, corroding ambition, whetted and encreased by unavailing attempts, and a Hate of political despair, ’ were, in his Lordship’s contemplation, ever productive of malice and personal enmity, arid “ that word : species of corruption, a corrupt heart—but the noble Earl is a Tory; he was then in opposition to the Whigs; whoever opposed his friends, whether in or out of place, mud have acted from factious motives and a corrupt heart.

The noble Lord had exerted his great talents in endeavouring to prove the folly and improbability of luppoling that nriniders would withhold from Parliament, or ever had, ’ such information as was necedary for the full consideration of Parliament, when they came to decide upon any great or important question. This, he perceived, had been urged in favour of the present measure, as well as every other preceding one dnce the commencement of the present war. Now let their Lordships attend only for a minute to the case as it really Hood within their Lordships ’ own knowledge,. and derived from evidence within that Ploufe.. Previous to the commencement of hodilities in America, the noble Lords who fat 6n that fide of the House warned minifrers of the consequences which were likely to ensue. After hoftilitias had taken place, and that upon the adiirances of a. noble Lord, at the table ( Lord. Sandwich ) that, the Americans -. were, cowards and poltroons, and refembled an herd of Iheep, who, in pro -

I 3 por -

- PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781 ;

portion as they were numerous, were drove with the greater facility; when it was fatally discovered, that they were “not so totally bereft of native courage, nor the means of refinance, as had been dtscribed by the noble Earl alluded to; did not those persons who disapproved of the war, make the rrioft earnest and repeated efforts to substitute treaty for the sword, and instead of coercion, measures of blood and slaughter, and unconditional submission, recommend conciliation, and a fecu - ' rity for and recognition of the political rights of pur American subjects ? When over - ruled and borne down by numbers in their, repeated efforts to this efxedt, did not they continue tq dissuade them from the mad pursuit, by predicting the inter - ference of France ? and when that event had taken place, had not the fame men recourse to the fame exhorfatory perfua - fives in respect of Spain : and so on to the very i nil ant he was speaking ? Did not all - their predictions turn out exactly as they were foretold, no matter what motives those predictions might have originated from ? and was it not thence clear, that ppposition were perfectly right in respect of the policy of the war ? As to the other point, so strongly urged by the noble Earl, that whether miniflers were right or wrong, they acted upon the most pure and honest motives; and that Parliament, as well as the nation, had approved of their

conduCt - here he begged leave to differ from ' the noble

Earl, as to the conclusion which he drew; for besides being convinced that corruption strongly operated in procuring a Parliamentary sanction to the several measures he had pointed out, he was authorized - to say, that other aids were called in, in order to the giving success to a favourite fyflem—the aids of deluflon, falsehood, imposition, and ministerial ieduClion. He could ppint out, were he to confute lhs memory, innumerable inflances of the ’ kind during the progrefs of the war. He ' would just advert, to one, however, which could not be doubted of, fmcc it was acknowledged by a noble Lord in his place in that House, who presides at the head of one of the first departments in the state ( Lord Sandwich ) who, when the mad projeCl of subduing America by force of arms was first : conceived, inllead - of augmenting our naval force, at the commencement of a war, intended to be chiefly a maritime one, reduced the number of teamen from 20, 000 to 16, 000; and when - afterwards reminded, that mifearriages and diiappointments chiefly arose from our having an inadequate naval force, his Lordship did not controvert the faCl, but had the confidence to rife in the fame House, and in the fame place, and acknowledge that he was confcions that the force '.. ' i. .. ... yoted

A. 178/. D E. B A T E S.

voted was inadequate; but that be foresaw, if he had proposed what, appeared to him to be an adequate force, it niight probably have created an alarm in Parliament and the nation, and have tended to defeat the measures ' Which had been previously agreed upon and settled by the King’s miniffcers.

So far, therefore, from administration having a ^ Vccl. upon the purest motives, or oppolition upon the woiffi, it was evident, that the former had riot only employed the general weight and influence, which is the established suppoft or appendage - of government, but had further strengthened their plans, and promoted this great object of their wiflies, by trick, impolition, and deceit; while, on ' the other‘hand, though the motives. of oppolition. might be called in question, their political forelight, and the tru ' th of their repeated predictions, inuft Hand uncontrovered and unimpeached; and in no one instance more firikingly so, than that one deluflon begot a situation - which made another neceflfary, till at length our affairs became so embroiled and pregnant with difficulties, that many who had ' perceived their error, found thetnfelvea brought into ' a predicament, ' in which it appeared to them more dangerous and fatal to recede than to; pufh 1 forward, trailing every thirig to future events and spebulative. contingencies. f

The noble Earl said, that all oppolition to public measures were composed of the lame ingredients, and that a love of power, &c. would ever operate to produce them, be the measures proposed ever so wife, salutary, and necessary. This; he affirmed to be contrary to common experience - and public evidence. He was ready to grant, that mixed governments Igave b ' n th to contrariety of sentiment and opinion, and of rcourse, that the bell and wifeft measures were liable to be iquellioned and opposed; but he denied the inference the no - Ible Lord had endeavoured to draw from the general obfer - ivation. All adminifbratiqris did not create the fame degree ! of oppolition, nor were they deserving of it; nor would all jadminillrations, if. compared at a subsequent period, {land ( the tell of comparison, so as to be reduced to the fame llan - jdard. He came into Parliament very young, but he was old ( enough to have a feat in that House through the whole of the glorious and luccefsful administration of the Earl of Chatham ( then Mr. Pitt ); and hq well remembered, though he believed every thing ' done by that celebrated llatefmaiv might not be universally approved of, - that there was little or no oppolition made in Parliament to his administration,

£ *. PARLIAMENTARY 4. 1781.

fp long as he continued - in office. He, for : one, heartily concurred in such of his measures as came under deliberation when he was present; and yet he could say, that h$ had no intimacy nor political connexion whatever with his. Lordship. He had scarcely a personal acquaintance with him, nor was he ever under his roof but once, and that merely upon a matter of business. He would, not now enter into any comparative view of the present administration ancj that conduced by that able and honest statesman. He would observe, however, that the glories of that administration were now all tarnished, or their effects no longer felt; and that before the very monument designed to perpetuate them was finished.

His Grace, early in his speech, in reply to Earl BatHurst, took. notice, that what he had laid relative to corruption, though he had literally meant and applied it to even the majority of that House, he did not. expert that his Lordship would have taken it up with so much severity; for as it was the doctrine of the noble Earl and his friends, that all go vernment must be carried on by force or corruption, and as he understood it was not the profeifed deiign of the present set of men in power to introduce a government by force, by first fuperleding the forms of the constitution, it was natural to conclude, that they had embraced the other part of the alternative, that of carrying, on the business of government through the influence of corruption.

Earl of The Earl of Chejicrjisid rofe to, the qu. eftion as soon as the Chijhrf. eldPuke of Richmond fat down, ar ? d arraigned, in very severe terms, the conduct of certain Lords in that House,. who, while they so strenuously contended for the right of free dif - cuflion and opinion in their own case, denied it to their opponents. Whoever had the niisfortune to differ from them, was instantly pronounced to be weak, ignorant, or incapable : and not even contented with denying them all ability, they added to the rest charges of the most criminal and dishonoura -

^ O

ble nature; if it was not weaknefs, it was corruption; so that it was impossible to escape from the obloquy meant to be thrown upon them in any event.

This, surely, was a conduct on the part of those who pur - sued it equally unjuft and unbecoming, and ftruek at the very essence of parliamentary independence; it was arrogant, to say no worfe, in one ' event, and indecent in the other; and if charges of that kind were to be permitted, most certainly the party ' thus accused were every way entitled and

justir

A. ' 178 - 1. D E B A T E : S. ’

justified in recriminating : if noble Lords of a certain descrip - tion thought fit to charge folly and corruption ori their opponents, those - traduced were warranted to retort the accusation back again; and prefume, that none could make such unjuft charges, had not conviCtionarofe From internal evidence arising in their own breads. '

As to the measure communicated by his Majesty to the House, he was of opinion, that it was dictated by political necefiity, which left no choice to the King and his ministers.

Holland, through the whole of their conduCt, since the commencement of the rebellion in America, manifefted a most inimical and treacherous disposition towards this country; which was evident, as well by the protection and countenance they shewed to the rebel pirate Paul Jones, while he lay in the Texel, as by the late conduCt of one of their admirals at St *

Euflatia, who not only saluted, or returned the salute of the rebel vessels, but even confiscated the property of our fub - jc£ts, who had captured some of the rebel ships and property, and brought them into that ifland. He was perfectly persuaded, for one, that Holland only waited to declare publicly, what she had been long meditating, namely, till her navy was in a condition to a £1 offenfively, and to afford protection to their commerce and1 extensive dominions; or, as occasion might offer, of acting hoftilely against us in confederacy with France and Spain.

Such being the conduCt and apparent ultimate views of Holland, he was firmly perfuaded, that the measure now under consideration was the only one which could be adopted, confident with national dignity, and the security and preservation of the state; and if fate should determine that wemuft fall, which in one event would most certainly be the case, he could not for a moment poftpone the decision; but rather prefer to fall with honour, than survive with infamy and dif - j grace.

The Duke of Chandos, after pronouncing a very high eu - Duke of logium on the public and private virtues of his Majesty, andCi ^ fli his good opinion of the laudable intentions of his ministers, though they had not been always attended with the wished - for success, laid, he most heartily approved of the spirit and vigour which manifeftly dictated the present measure. He made no doubt but it would be productive of more than one falu - tary effect. Befides disarming a pretended friend, but concealed enemy, from carrying their faithless and destruCtive schemes into execution, it would convince our open foes of

M PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

V - *

the fixed determination and magnanimity of this country, though surrounded by an hoft of foes, and contending for her rightful dominion over so. great a body of her own unnatural and rebellious subjects.

He acknowledged. that our situation was critical arid perilous, and that opportunities might have been loft; but it was too late to take a retrofpeft,. and nothing now remained to be done, but to call forth the whole resources and strength of the country, and employ them effectually against our enemies. It was in vain to contemplate the magnitude of the danger for any other purpOie, but as it might suggest the, means of surmounting it; and whether the treaty or project negotiated and signed by Van Berkel and the Congrefs Delegate had been perfected, or ' formally approved of by the States General, was, in his apprehension, at this stage of the business, of very little importance. It was evident in every one point of view, the matter could, be impartially and rationally considered, that their condu£t was. such throughout as fully justified the measure which ministers had advised - their sovereign to adopt. Upon this ground he must of course give his negative to the motion made by the noble Duke, and his hearty affirmative to the address moved in answer to his Ma - jesty’s meffage.

Marquis of The Marquis of Rockingham expressed his astonishment at

Rockingham novej language which had prevailed that day on the oppo - site benches. The whole ministerial system of politics had been changed; opinion suspicion, and vague and uncertain appearances had been fubstituted for fa£ts, and motives urged or approved of for precipitating the nation into a war, which, he believed, never before influenced the ' decisions of a council of state in a civilized country. He was not, for one, much surprised at any absurdity which may have prevailed in his Majesty’s councils, so long as the present administration retained their guidance and direction. His astonishment arose from a very different cause; from the sudden change of conduct in the fame men, on the fame iubje£f, and that in fofhort a space of time.,

He remembered, a very few years since, before France had publicly declared. When there were the most inequivocal proofs that file was secretly assisting America; that, the constant answer made.. by the present ministers was, i ( it cannot be, for vve continue to receive the most satisfactory aliurances of not only their intention not to interfere in the dispute with America, or assist our American subjects in arras

! I

I

4

A. 1. 781 ., DEBATES.

against us, but of friendship and good will. 9 Nay, after the

French cabinet began in part to develope their future intentions, by permitting their subjects to open a kind of commercial traffic, ministers continued to hold the fame language; and finally, when the noble Lord in the green ribbon, then ambassador at the French court, lent home in his public capacity information of an actual treaty having been signed and solemnly ratified by the French king and the United States of America, ministers still affected to disbelieve it. They refufed to give it the leaft degree ofcredit, though he - was perfwaded, if. they were really serious, they must have been the only persons in Great Britain who entertained a single doubt of its existence : but that was not. all; the treaty had been made for fix weeks; and yet, in the interim, no step was taken in consequence; nor did ministers own that they knew any thing of the matter, though daily reminded and goaded in both Houses of Parliament, till the very day that the Count de Noailles, the French miriifter, delivered the rescript to a noble viscount ( Weymouth ) then Secretary of State.

Here was the contrafted condudf of ministers upon similar occasions; not that they could be juftly deemed so; for one was their conduit towards a natural enemy and rival power, the other towards an ancient ally; neither was. it similar in other respeits, for though ministers had the most direct proofs, not of the intentions of what France meant to do, but what she had already actually done, no notice was taken of it; whereas ministers, not having a tittle of proof of any kind, on the present occasion, of what Hollaud had already done, or meant to do, we waited in the former instance till France declared, by the mouth of her ambassador, the steps Hie had taken; and now refufed the States General a few days tocon - fider, as it might be fairly prelumed, of the proper mode of - riving the satisfadticm desired, and of the means of doing it effectually.

He recollected another instance of the conduct of the present mi niftry, which corresponded with that towards France, arid was directly contrary to the spirit and principle of the present measure ^ The noble Lord who now presides at the Admiralty Board ( Lord Sandwich ) was not at the time in the fame office, but he nevertheless approved of it, in another capacity ( Secretary of State ) he meant the conduct of Spain inrespectof Falkland’s Island, when the captain of a Spa - flish frigate had the unheard - of infolence to take off the rud - Vol, I, K der

PARLIAMENTARY A. 178U

der ofa : British. man of war,; so atrocious, an inCult, as in the opinion of a celebrated naval officer, {ince deceased ( Sir iCharles Saunders ) as to fully justify this country in attacking the ports, harbours, and naval arlenals of Spam; and, if it could be. effected, of even laying Madrid in allies. Was not this an aggression of the highest and mod : aggravated nature ? and yet, how was it possible to patiently liften to the very fame men, and their friends, who tamely put up wkh; inch an outrage upon the dignity of the nation, and the honour of the British flag, now recommending to plunge their country into a war with a power allied by treaty, and con - ne£ted by the dearest reciprocity of interest, and mutual preservation and support, at a time top, when we are contending with the united force of the House of Bourbon, and one third of our own subjects armed and eventually confede - ratedj. for our total ruin, if pot annihilation, as afpverei ^ n §nd independent state.

There was another circumstance, if possible, tp heighten : the folly, and which aggravated th. e iropplicy of the a£V, that the condu£l of the States General was condemned in the lump, and sentence passed upon them without hearing what they had to urge in point of sass, or declare ir ? point of intention,. How could we pronounce, for a certainty, that the States General had the leaft intimation of the treaty which ministers had. so confidently laid at their door ? Wag it not much more, probable that they had not,. as after a period of almost two years and an half, for aught that appeared, or was even pretended, not a single veftige of if could be traced. Was it not, if probability were to govern, more likely that the parties, who devjfed and framed this project, seeing no profpeft of, giving it effect, had cautiously concealed it; or even sup - pofing the worst, that the governing power ip Holland might have come to the knowledge of fuc ] i a treaty, they had sup - prefTed it in embryo, and passed the affair over in filep. ce, from politic and prudential motives ? Be this, however, as it may, taking the affair in any light, but as a treaty approved and ratified by the States General of the Seven United Provinces, he was clearly of opinion that the war was impolitic, and, he was perfuaded, unjuft. Such being his feptiments, he should ' be for poftponing the address, and giving his affirmative for the motion made by his noble friend, in ojrder to satisfy their Lordships of the injustice of a measure, which might in its, co ' nfequences involve such vaft numbers of innocent persons in, the - lofsApJf their - properties and their lives,

' ' r. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. The

. a .; i ' /Sr. O £ i A t1 e s. 67

' "The Earl 6$ ' Coventry confirmed several observations ' mactb Csventrj by the noble Lord Who spoke last. He attributed all our public misforidnes to the weak or miftaken policy in the first instancejtharof attempting to make laws for governing America against their own. consent; endeavouring to give effect to those laws ' by means of coercion; and laftly, to the mad - iiefs of expectirig to subdue the vaft continent of America ' by force of arms. This unhappy, this fatal warj was pregnant with misfortune and, if not speedily. put an end to he made no doubt would still continue to bring with it daily; embarraffmerits. He never, from the earliell commence ^ ment Of this buliriefs, entertained a ' second opinion on the subje£t. - America, if retained at all, he - thought mull be retained - merely upon the title of popular content, upon mutual confidencevaifd affection, and the government of the parent state; be recognized by the only ground on which government can rest with safety, that is, general approbation *

However prejudice might warp, and Zeal miflead it muffc be evident to : ariyperfon who could divest hittifeif a mbmerit of them, ' that America could never continue under the dominion of the Britishvgovernment a moment longer than senti - ment, affection; - and political interest bound her; and even if our dominion could be maintained by force, it would be little •Ids destru&ive to1 this - country than actual separation; because it would be but of a temporary continuance, and must at no very distarit period give way to the real wifhes and power of the people.

He should not go at large into the question, further than just to observe conformably to the measure proposed to their Lordships, and tb. - the laws and ufages acknowledged and established by sovereign and independent states, that he doubted much of the justiceN of the war unless ministers had more full and relative information, and would consent to communicate it to their Lordships; and he was much more confirmed in his opinion that it might be so, when he coupled the policy with the justice of the measure. He Would not retribute on those persons who suppoled, that every noble Lord on the fide of the House he fat, opposed the measures of the present set of ministers from improper motives. He hoped his conduct was such, though his opposition had been uniform, as to exempt him from confciously applying any part of the imputation to himself; but whatever interpretation might be put on his conduct, when he expressed his disapprobation of the present measure, it was to him a matter of great indifference; he allured the noble Lords that he trembled for the coniequences

K js, when

PARLIAMENTARY; A. 1781.

when he considered the enormous amount of our debt, the immenfity of our taxes, their extreme preffureupon the lower orders and laborious part of the community, and the further burthens which mull continue to increase and accumulate, so long as the war should laftr

He had lately passed several weeks in the country, and had not been quite inattentive to the Hate of the class of men whom he mentioned; and it was with grief he beheld the fatal effefb of the present ruinous and destru&ive war. The county in which he redded [ Worcester ]. was a great manufacturing county; and it was almofi : incredible to believe what vaft numbers were put of employment, in a starving condition, or obliged to apply to the parish for relief. The evil was not confined to the lower orders of the people; it had reached of course the farmer and manufacturer, and at length made its way to the land - downer and country gentleman. Land had decreased nearly one half in value bnce the present war; new taxes were laid, on each iucceffive year in an inverie proportion; and though the latter description were dill able to keep up, appearances, it. was only by discontinuing many of those expences which. arose from their dtuation and rank in life;. but when with. a debt of almost two hundred millions, and an annual interest payable on it of seven millions, fourteen or. fifteen millions new debt was to be incurred this year, and, so in proportion,

. so long as the war should continue—the idea was indeed terrible ! He therefore wasjuftified in concluding, when further taxes came to be laid, and {till further provisions for debts to be hereafter incurred were added, that the ruin which such an accumulation of burthen would produce would become uni - verfal : and that want and distress, which had hitherto only affected the lower clals of people, would soon extend itfelf to all ranks and degrees; for the time was swift approaching, and mult inevitably take place, when the lands of England would be mortgaged to the public creditors for full - one half of their real value ! •

He had dweit upon those circumstances in order to shew I the strong motives ministers had to act with the greatest cau - I tion and circumfpeCtion in respect to the present measure; I and how much it was their duty, when deciding on the juf - \, tice of the war, to take likewise into consideration the expedi - j ency of it—to weigh the provocation against the consequences, and make an estimate from every motive which the internal ! ilate of the country, as well as our situation in respect of ourf foreign enemies might suggest, and fee whether a line might ndt be chalked out between a tame acquiescence, and an aft !

4 of I

■ D ' E "B; - A : T /\ E; S.

of; political despair, which appeared to him, the instant he. wasspeaking, tolead to greater and more fatal evils than perhaps were ever before experienced by any other nation .; z : He most sincerely believed, - th ^ t - it was not merely the incapacity of ministers, or any sinister. miptives, which, could have induced them. to take this daft precipitate step,, It wa9 directly repugnant tp the established system on which they had hitherto a£led tovvards : foreign - powers. It vvasrin his under - standing an act of political desperation, or, like the, undone gamester, hazarding all upon a Angle. dye \ he meant, u. nlefs fom. e. favourable. circumstances were held back, which from prudence or other reasons itmight; notf be; prudent tore veal.

, Uninformed of the motives on rwhich ministers a&eci, he could only, judge from appearances, r, and, upon that evidence he was free, to lay, that they; ftoodjin a great measure exculpated in his. eyes, for. he could only eohfider them as inftrii - ments acting in a state of infatuation, ^ under the influence or decree of Divine, Providence ^. in order to, scourge a dev. qted land j but under vyliateyer influence, they ^, might have a < sted -,

Jie sincerely wilhed, : that, those who were supppfed not to be under. any such impulfe,.. would. call for, the information, necessary. tofatisfy : the House of the in the meflTfig. e,

. that the manifel ^ ot arofo out of neceffity ^ nd that to, three most formidable and powerful enemies, ' we had been unfortunately compelled to call a fourth against "us, into the field. '

: The Earl of Fauconber. g complained much of the - language Ea. rJ. of; which was predominant iiy; one part of that Jioufe, agd; vvhicfi Faunuierg. imputed corrupt motives indilcriminateiy; to such t of - their Lordships as supported the measures - of, gover n me n t, rIt - was a charge easily made, and with difficulty ., refuted.. Jn his opinion, the conrtmry approached. nearer the truth. apd that those who opposed government, opposed - it with, a view tp get into place. At all -. eyents5jhe could answer, so far as the ac - cufation - might be,. supposed, to affe£t - himself, that he, was above being bribed,, or corrupted. His fortune was ample, and put, him out of the power of temptation; and lie could. safely affirm, that it vvas not the emoluments - arising, from, the places which he. held [ a lord of the bedchamber - and colonel of a new raised regiment ] that induced hinvto accept of them, ' but the honour of serving his Sovereign, whose person he loved, and whose virtues he revered. One of the trusts he. held vvas of a military nature, and, he believed, those who knew iny. thing of him, orabout that transaflion, could not imagine thafhe was induced to accept of it from motives of profit or

with

jb PAR L1A $1 ENT AR Y A i ? 8i,

With ra rview of iemolu merit. He ' attired their Lordships ^ that his motives brigihated from another source; •WH&i France, allied wi th our rebellions subje ' ft ^ threatened ' ah1 in ? vafion, he thought that his; loyalty to his ' Prince and love of his country called upon him to offer hisferviebs; ' He; did differ thfem, and theywere gracibufly1 ' accepted -; and he Valued his present situation much more bn account; of the affe£lidn : he bore his ' M. ajesty, than frdm ' any advantage he could poflibly de - tive from - it/ ' He prbtefled sincerely, for one, if it could be so settled in ' general, thathe Would very cliearfully surrender - whj [ { he received to the uses of the state. As he - was disposed tb believe, that much of ' the opposition made tb public measures, a foie more against the propofers of1 them, oh account of the emoluments which ' t - h ' ey; enjoyed, than the measures themselves, he vvould gladly rbfi ' gri what he enjoyed to the clamorous and difeontented, in order to purchase unanimity and concords

He thought it became the duty of every loyal subject and friend to his counts ytb; Hand forth at ! this alarming crilis, against both our foreign ' and domestic enemies; against all new - fangled opinions relative to ideal schemes of political reformation, which1 ‘tended merely to create and noiirish dif - - contents, innovations/which, if permitted or encouraged, - would end, he feared ' /in national distradtion and public con - fusion.

The Earl of Earl of SZWiwrtf/ [ LbfdWycombe ^ rofe and said he arrived Shelburne. in town but the night before, and nothing but the immenfc magnitude of the qiieflion urider ' their Lordships ’ considera - tabn could have induced him to come down to the House that day. ' ' He had long determined to abferit himfeff from his attendance there, because he was convinced it was but of his power to render his countly; any essential service, as public affairs now flood, and as government was conducted. If I his attendance that day had not {truck him, as a fuperiorj call of duty, which could not on motives : of honour and con - 1 icience be dispensed with; he allured their Lordships, had ! he staid away, he would have been furnished with a veryl cogent apology, namely, his having been attacked io the ! ' country, with a violent illnefs; and he feared that in the ! course of the observations he was about to make, that eircum - i fiance vvould prevent him from giving the degree of attention ! which a subject of so much importance ncceifarily demanded. !

He had, on former occasions, at several times, particular - 1 3y towards the conclulion of the last session, resolved tb givel their Lordships and himself no further trouble respe£Urfg the |

mifeondudi

A.. i 8r. D : E B A T E Sf/

misconduct of ministers, and the fatal effects of the measures which they had from time to time recommended to that House; he had hitherto faithfully kept his word, and wcffild hereafter continue as faithfully to adhere to it. But a Dutch war ! a war with Holland ! as soon as it reached his ears, filled him with amazement, —What, a war with Holland ! with our ancient allies and natural friends ! whose efforts and connexions, for - more than a century, have proved the chief security of both states ! their surest and best safeguard ! A war between those. powers, who, while united, not only sup - ported their own independence, but the liberty and inde -, pcndence of all Europe—the great preservers of the balance of power : A rupture between two states thus circumstanced, and thus allied, he could hardly give credit to; and when he did, it only served to fill his breast wi th a mixture of grief and astonishment I—It benumbed all the faculties of his : mind, and in its fiirft effects, left no other impression there : but wonder and amazement !

He assured their Lordships, that he did not now rife to ' condemn ministers, or to point out the folly and incapacity which marked so strongly every {ingle feature of their public ! conduct since our unhappy rupture With America. He could have. no personal ill will to them; on the contrary, there I were some among them for whom he enteitained great re - 1 speft; neither did he wish, as had been mentioned by a noble I Earl, [ Bathurst ] early in the debate, and by more than one noble - Lord in the course of it, to succeed to any one of their fimations. Therefponfibility and labour annexed to such situ - ations rendered a succession neither definable nor enviable, in his apprehension, at any time; but at such a period as the present, that man ' s mind must be strangely framed indeed, who, upon any pretence or temptation, could be induced to accept of any high or responfible office, when he must be [ convinced, that the bappieft union of talents, integrity, and popular confidence, aided by the utrnoft vigour of mind and laborious induftry, had not, even in imagination, any thing, on whjch it couldfecurely rest .; and when the most sanguine hopes and warmeft expectations must build their proposed success more upon chance and a succession of fortunate events, than from a eonfeioufnefs of real abilities, strength - ened. by national co - operation and united councils. But his wish to succeed to any of the present ministers was out of the ( jucftion ? Ministers knew it, and of course they would not

PAR LI A M E N T A RlY A. 1781,

djeriy it; they; need not, be told, that nothing copld - tempt him into so embarrafiing and perplexing a situation '.

A, Dutch war, he confelTed, called Kim once more, and he believed for the daft time, to ' that House; and while he was full of the strongeft emotions that he ever felt upon any ©ccasion of the kind, he found himself almost totally unable to proceed The idea was immenfe, and the subject much beyondhis grasp; he could take a view of : this or that particular part of it; but when the subject prefen ted itfelf together, it. filled his mind in the fame manner that he felt when he contemplated the national debt. He, or any of their Lordships, could easily measure in their minds a few thousand pounds; more might be added, and coxiiputation might be pushed to a certain length; but when it is known that the national debt was swiftly approaching to the enormous futn of two hundred millions, the mind became bewildered and clouded; even the powers of imagination failed; it re - sembled infinity of space, or infinity of duration, which only serves to produce doubt and uncertainty; so it was respecting the Dutch ' war; reflexion was at an end; invefti - gation had nothing to examine. The more attentively it was considered, the lefs it was understood; and when the probable consequences it would produce presented themselves, it led into an ocean of doubt, alarm, apprehension, and mental distra£tion.

His Lordship, in a general reply to what had been thrown out respecting party, laid, that he wished not to be included in any such distin < ftion. He neither was bred pr trained up in party principles, nor had ever lifted. in any. He care. fully avoided it, because he knew it would answer no good end; and experience had. convinced him that he acted right. - But it was ridiculous to suppose that there was any such thing as party now existing. —There was not—There were numbers of persons in both Houses in opposition; but the re - fult did not constitute a party. —Opposition w&s composed of a great number of petty f ^ uads of individuals but their Oonduft, if it aimed at any thing, ' had defeated the very purposes of an effectual opposition; and when. ever they seemed to unite in opinjd. n upon any important questiop, their attempts had always, and ever would, lie ventured to predicl, rnifcarry. It was in vain to oppofe the measures of administration; the Crown had gained an irrefiftible influ - 1 ence, which bore down every ' thing before it; the people I and Parliament had acquiesced, or, if any effort was made to

' ’ ' " flew

' f > E B A T ’ £ Si

tern it, J lt‘66i ^ ‘lerVo3y to prbye the folly of the attempt ^ arid that every, itruggle answered. no other purpose but to5 angnient; tHaf in ^ uence it. was set, on foot to correct and prefer ib ^ limits to; the consequence of which was, on the part of those who flood forth in oppofition tb government, that they were deemed criminal because they pfoyed unfuccefsful .,; they were publicly abused, and privately traduced; arid even were disappointed of that species of consolation which every man, more or lefs, looks for, when he contends for the rights and welfare of his fellow - citizehsj ’ and by being held up by their opponents as. the < e - cret or ' avowed enemies of their country, and the factions ' and interested oppofers of the King and his measures, had the additional mortification of being rendered, in fornc measure, unpopular. His full perfuaiion that this was the effect of the ineffectual struggle he had been for many years engaged in, was, he sincerely declared, his ! foie reason ' for absentinghimself from his duty in that House. ' He had made up his miild the last day he had the honour of addressing their Lordships on the subject; nor had he any reafori ’ firice to depart from that resolution. He trusted. that his friends would think /it a sufficient one; if it should not appear to them in that light, he would have the consolation, that it brought the most full and perfect conviction home to his own mind.

The conduct which he had prescribed ta himself this day, was by no means a departure from the rule abovementioned. He attended now as a Privy Counfellor in the great heredi -; tary council of the nation, tq offer advice to his Sovereign, iat a irioment of national peril and distress. - He had consulted no perfori, and was acquainted with the sentiments of only a very few. He knew his own, however, and would declare them fairly, openly, and without disguise, - or without the leaft regard to those of any. - other man. Before he ventured into detail, or the proofs on which he had founded his opinion, the general felult ' of what he h&d learned, or. could discover,. was, that we should instantlyfupprefs the manifefto, and endeavourimriiediately to i; eturn once more into a state of amity and ’ allUarice with the republic of Holland.

. His Lordship then proceeded to difeufs the questioft on the groundsofjufti ' ce and political expediency ., In respect to the former, he contended that the conduCkofadministration. was pbrhaps the most extraordinary that ever entered into the mind of man. Tie treaty iigned by the pensionary Van V ^; i : L Berkei

PARLIAMENTARY A. ^ 81.

JBerkel was no more than a project to be. hereafter entered into, and was besides conditional, ^ orfjcphtingent. At was only to have effefl ' upon a future ^ event : namely, if the confederated States of America should hereafter be declared independent by the powers of Europe; but though it - had been authenticated and confirmed by. the States General of the United Provinces, it could not in any light be considered as an aggression, at leaft such an aggrefiion as would juf - tify the commencement of hoftilities on our, part, There were besides some other circumftarices ' which rendered the paper much lefs offenfive, for ii; was after Parliament had offered terms very little short of American independency; and when the separate proportions of one of the American Commissioners were added ( Governor Johnflone ) which proportions, though denied in argument, or explained away, were never diibwned by ministers in direct terms, the w ’ hole amounted, with what Parliament had offered, toaftate little short of absolute independence, so far as the sovereignty of the Britishi legif -. lature was concerned. Bur the main and ' only true question. oii which the measure of hoftility was to rest, or be supported, was this : Was the treaty signed by Van Berkel and Mr. Lee, the Congrefs delegate, binding on the States General, and America, or either ? If it was not, then he was autho - riled to say, that the treaty was not an act for which the governing power in Holland was ftri£tly, generally, or equitably reiponfible.

' Another consideration he begged leave to prefs upon their Lordships ’ mind, which he hoped would meet with that de gree of attention it ieemed to him to merit. He would sup - pofe the utmost that was stated; he would suppose that the States General knew of the treaty even before the traiifaction Was communicated by Sir Joseph Yorke at the Hague; and still further, that the poftponing the complaint ad referendum ^ was either a denial of satisfaction, or something bordering upon it. This he would take to be the utmost point mini - iters could ft ' retch, what ' they had been pleased to make his Majesty assert was an aggression on the part of Holland. He would not suppose it; he would take it for granted, because it was fb stated in the maoifefto on the table, the only authority upon which their Lordships were desired to vote the ad - drefV. Were, ' then, ministers as ignorant of the constity - tion of Holland as they were of every thing else whicliy related to foreign affairs ? Were they sure that it was in the power of the States General to give redrefs, much lefs punish the suppoxed delinquents ? Were they so uninformed as not

‘ “ to

75

tii ' tfit. p ' ' E B; A T. E ' s,

to know that the States General could not at all take cognt - zapce of the affair, without conlult and deliberation ? It seems ‘ they were. He ' would tell, themj. imperfectly acquainted as he Was with the confiitution of the Dutch re - public, that it was not competent for the States General, in their deliberative ’ capacity, to exercise an act of fbvereign power over any one of the other provinces, much lefs to overturn their municipal rights, or violate the laws. He believed the fact was notoriously known; at leaft hiftory and experience, in a great variety of instances, confirmed it. It was notorious that some of the subjects of the republic fold powder and military stores to the French during the liege of Bergen ^ of ' zoom, the celebrated siege in the waV before the last ( a town that was the acknowledged key of their own dominions ) and thereby enabled the enemy to take it : it was no lefs so that they were frequently detected in the fame illicit traffic in the West - Indies, upon other occasions, when they supplied the {hips of their own and our enemies from St. Euftatia, and even at sea. But probably ministers forgot that Holland was a state composed of merchants, whole great view was to promote and extend their commerce, and that acts, which in other countries would be deemtfd of a very heinous and punishable nature, were considered in Holland but mere venial offences : even allowing the contrary, his argument held equally good, as to the point of aggression; that it was not in the power of the States General to give a clear and specific answer to Sir Joseph Yorke’s memorial; nor even give a promife to punish or redrefs any grievance which might l ^ ave been occasioned by the conduct of apcrfoa or persons amenable to the provincial States of Holland only, land exclusively answerable to the local tribunals within that particular jurisdiCti on.

j The noble Lord in the green ribbon had talked of the SDuke of Marlborough, and that great and magnanimous jPrince, King William, on whom he had bestowed such just jculogiums, and ventured to answer for them, that if they had been now alive they would act precifely as the present ’ ministers had done. He denied the assertion to be founded, [ and spoke, he prefumed, upon as good an authority as that of he noble Lord, upon the authority of hiftory—of what had bally happened, not upon what might probably have happened, j In the first place, he would contend, that the Prince of Orange, as King of England, would never have broke with Holland, or have disunited a conjunction of power, which L 2 was

PARLIAMENTARY A,. 1. 981,

was the only barrier for the support of the Protestant religion, and the preservation ' of the liberties, or balance of power in Europe, again ft the encroachments and alarming ambition of Lewis the XIVth, or now of the Hbufe of bourbon. On the contrary, that great Prince, as King of England, and while Prince oF Orange, conceived the interests of Great Britain and Holland to be the fame. He carried this idea to its fulleft extent, and ail the real friends of both countries united in the fame opinion.. Since the first establishment of the republic, in the reign of that glorious and wife Princefs Queen Elizabeth, this continued the prevailing idea in the British councils; unless in a few instances, when the exception explained itlelf—he meant the contest. between England in the time of the Protectorate and Holland; and the two Dutch wars, in the reign of Charles the Second. Cromwell, it was well understood, knew little of foreign politics, and besides was led to connect himfqlf with France, in order to support his usurpation. The wars in the reign of Charles the Second originated in the court, and from motives in which the nation had very little to do, unless it was to plum - der both Holland and England, leizing the Dutch property, and diverting the public grants to private purppfes. The present measure, he was perfuaded, originated likewise from the court, and though probably not from the like motives, from others no lefs absurd, destru&ive, and disgraceful to the nation, as he should hereafter endeavour to demonstrate. On this ground he was supported by historical evidence tq assert, that it had been the policy of the most able and honest statesmen this country ever boasted of, to cultivate not only alliances, and to form connections with Holland, but indeed the most inward confidence and friendship.

The noble Lord in the green ribbop, when he spoke of what Marlborough and King William would now do, seemed to be totally ignorant of what they had done. The Prince, though King of England, and Stadthplder, was repeatedly informed, that several of the subjects of the United Provinces corresponded with his enemies, and supplied France secretly with military stores for carrying on the war He had evi - j dence of it frorp their written coryespondence, on variou ^ occasions. He complained in his double capacity, as King ! and Stadtholder, but was. ob}ig$d tq fit down cqntentedj without obtaining redrefs : nay, more, he once got a packet ? hto his hands directed to fbme of the principal traitors, whd tyere burgomasters, and wa§ obliged ^ in his ipagiftraticaj

A. 1781. D E B A ’ T, E - S.

character, to lay it unopened before the States General, who, after the fulleft evidence of the fa&, fufFered the whole to pass away unnoticed, without even censure, much left punishment or public disavowal. At this time, nevertheless Great Britain and Holland were contending for their all,, their respective. religions and liberties against Louis the XIVth, then in the zenith of his glory. When, therefore, noble Lords talked of satisfaction, punishment, difavowals, &c. he could not help smiling, particularly when this language was supported upon the great names of Orange and Marlborough, the latter of whom, as well as the former, while he was pulling down the formidable and alarming power of Louis the XIVth, and procuring a barrier for Holland, was well apprized that many of the subjects of that republic were concerned in transactions, which, in the language of the royal manifefto, the mefiage, the proposed ad - dress, and the noble Viscount who moved it, would have been deemed an aggression sufficient to justify a declaration of war; yet the latter, that immortal hero Marlborough, was io pufillanimous and wretched a politician as to continue to beat, year after year, the armies of France, and to fight the battles of a nation of secret traitors, and unprincipled republicans ! !

On the other part, the injustice of the commencing hofti - lities, he was no Iefs full and explicit. He ' said it would foot the deeper the encreasing jealously, and confirm the general odium which had prevailed all over Europe, ori account of ourcon - du£l towards France, previous to the declaration of the last war; proofs of which he was witness to when he travelled on the continent, in innumerable instances. He was, it is true, well received by certain persons, but whenever the steps taken in respect of the seizure of the French ships happened to be mentioned, it was either condemned in the strongest and most pointed terms, or, if people remained fiient, a mixture of horror and indignation seemed to be apparently painted on their countenances. At a later, period indeed, when the brilliancy and rapid succession of our victories and successes raised the name of Briton to the highefc pinnacle of fame and military glory, they dazzled the eyes of the multitude, and in fomc measure sanctified the means by the end : but even then, when men reasoned, he could perceive either in the, words or actions of those he mixed with, a secret, or public disapprobation, indeed, of detefta - tion of the first beginnings of that war. All Europe was hurt

PARLIAMENTARY - A. iySi.

^ nd alarmed; we were called a nation of pirates and public plunderers; and it created, he was perfuaded, ' the feeds of that jealously, 1 the unhappy fruits of which have been; the principal cause that one half of Europe are in arms against us, and the other half remain inactive, and express a kind of silent pleasure at our approaching downfall.

' But what was the condu£l which created the jealously,; indignation, and secret ill - will, which he had been describing ? Toothing, when compared with that which ministers had now advised their ' Sovereign to adopt—though war had - not - been formally declared ' against France, hoftilities had commenced in the eastern and wefterri world— [ In the East - Indies in 3753, and in the back part of Virginia in 1754, where Washington, then a Major of a Virginia militia regiment, with dome regulars, to the amount of 300, were made prisoners. }—Yet so careful was the British cabinet not to give cause of complaint or jealduly to the neutral powers, that they ordered the ships and cargoes to be laid up and pre - served, or where the commodities were perifhable, to be fold and held; till the end of the war, for the benefit of the re - ipe&ive owners, which intention was afterwards faithfully and punctually carried into execution.

This was the measured, cautious, and equitable conduCl j of the wife and honest ininiftryof George the Second. Now I for a minute compare and contrail it with that of their pre - j sent successors. In a time of the moll profound peace between the two states, allied by treaty, friendship, and common interest, without any hoftile appearance or preparation on the part of Holland; in the midft of the most perfect security and confidence, as well upon the faith of subsisting treaties, as under the universal and established customs current among, and acknowleded by, every civilized nation ontheface of the earth; upon an uncertainty at the best, and fofaras appears, upon the most fharneful pretext imaginable : what has been the decilion of the British cabinet ? To seize all Dutch ftiips, whether of private or public property j whether under commercial prote&ion, br drove in by stress, of weather, or the threatened destruction of the elements : — and what next ? —it may be supposed to compel justice, if withheld; to procure Tatis fa £t ion for some infult; to indemnify our own subjects; and to1 retain the property thus seized and withheld till the object, whatever it might be, should be attained. —By no means : —but to the disgrace of the country, to the total dishonour of its councils, a ' nd in direct

viola -

A, 17. 81. ? 7D1 EtB A T E S. "

violation of atl ' laws, whether, of nations, of nature, of pub - lie honour, and, private faith, the ships and, cargoes are seized, not; tp;. be retained ^ but confiscated for the joint cad - vantage of the captors and the state and what is worfe than all, a commandment given to render the municipal. tribunals the instrument of legalizing ah aft ;, which is equally repugnant to every Javv now existing in - the written codes, current, or of authority, throughout Europe.

His Lordilup, after pressing this point with great strength of argument and in a most rapid flow of language, observed, that besides the injustice of the aft, as a matter of state, it was a mauifeft imposition on the whole nation, and seducing the public upon two grounds, equally injurious to the ho noiir of the, nation and its interests. : It tended to miflead the public, by. inflaming. it with ill - fouhded refentments. j j and to gain, the approbation, of individuals, with a profpeft 1 of acquiring property to which they had no title, but what \ was founded in force and plunder. • ' : V

| But as. he laid when he ’ first rofe,. that we ought, in his I opinion, to endeavour to tread back the steps which led us into our present situation,. and at; all [ events seek. to effect a : 1 reconciliation, so he was clearly of opinion that it - was not

Iyet too late. An. opening, and a favourable one, stili pre - r ( ented. itfelf, if the newspapers were to be depended. upon, which was the only species of information the noble Vi ( count seemed willing to give their Lordships; —It was all : their Lordships were likely to have '; —it was all the information he had himself—The province of Zealand, as stated in the ^ Dutch Gazette, declared a desire of peace, and hoped it was not too late, but might be yet effected. It was the, duty of ministers to improve that difppfirion. towards reconciliation. He doubted not but it was stili prafticable; and as the only Drofpeft of procuring the salvation, of this country, - andre -

| : ving it from the infurmountable difficulties which fur - iunded \t on every fide, he earnestly recommended it to eir most serious attention. There was, it was true, onp eat impediment which flood in the way, and which the - folly. id precipitation of ministers had been the cause of ., bo far the hdme had answered the purposes it was intended to serve : le Dutch were called traitors and secret enemies,, in order to ring upon them the public odium; the dignity and honour f ( the crown described a : s being openly wounded; thefalva -. on of the state, say ministers, is deeply interested in the most idden and, decisive exertions against our new enemies -; and to

? giva

PARLI A ME NTARY A. 1781.

' /

give the whole the; more certain success, individuals are called upon and; invited to share - in the plunder;. their fortune ' s are to be made by the ruin of an innocent people, and that merely - on account of the particular conduit of a few - factious persons. 1 he alarm is struck, the : found is - instantly conveyed to everypart and corner of the kingdom, and the people1 are conjured to concur and assist in the general proposed destruction of a mifrepresented people. Ministers, like theparfons on the sea - coasts, piouily point out the booty; one party are detached here, another there, a third by a particular path and all exhorted to repair to the wreck, in order to partake of the plunder ;, No person waiting or hefitatiftg to afHH in the general ruin or making it a case of confcierice *

The impediment which flood in the way of reconciliation and to which he alluded, arose from the impolicy as well as ihjustice of the measure—that was issuing letters of ' marque and reprifals, and of course ordering the Dutch"property to be confiscated. This, he was ready to confess, would throw a strong ' bar in the way of amicable adjustment; because the public faith of the nation was pledged to the private captors, and a property veiled in them by law, which ' could not now be reclaimed, upon any other condition lhort of giving them an equivalent. —Be that however as it might, lo great was the object, in his mind, of an immediate reconciliation with the republic of Holland, that though the difficulties were greater than they seemed to be, and the expence of redeeming the prizes already made, by giving satisfaction to the1 captors, were double, nay treble what it was; he was clearly" of opinion, that no step, induftry, or management, should ’ be left untried, in orderr to regain if possible the friendship and alli - ance of Holland, or at all events to promote a friendly neu - j trality/ ;

In; the course of his Lordship’s argument, he observdd that sovereign Hates were extremely ignorant of the municipal laws and internal regulations which prevailed in other governments; and particularly lo in respect of Great Britain and Holland; the latter of which was notoriously known to be the most intricate and complicated in its movements that ever ' existed. ——He recollected an instance, which hap > pened to ' himself when he had the honour of serving his Majestyinan high office. [ Secretary of State for the ioiitherr department ] It was in the case of the Spanish Jefdits whc Were suppoled to possess a very considerable property in ou funds ^ which their sovereign, when he had dissolved tha

A. 1781V; D \E B A T ’ E S.

order,; and confiscated their property within his dominions, wiflied to seize ^ - —The Spanish minister made repeated applications to him on the subj. e£t, by the direction of the King his master. —He. was ailonished at the request, and endeavoured to convince him of the total impracticability of complying with it; the constitution would not permit it, for the laws were foftrorig and specific again# it, that even the property of a traitor could not be attacked in ' the manner desired. — But all his endeavours were in vain. The ambassador ( Prince Maflerano ) though an able and worthy man, could i not be perfuaded, but the court of Great Britain were fa -; vourably inclined to the Jesuits; and that we could have - easily granted, what, upon motives of concealed policy, he I prefumed we had refufed.

I His Lordship having explained very fully his opinion re - I lative to the injustice ofv commencing hoftilities again# the I Dutch republic, considered the measure on the other ground that of expediency; and it was here his Lordship, with his usual abilities and extensive information, entered into acom - prehenfive, though a brief and correct yiew of the state of the nation.

He laid it down as a proposition, to which every noble Lord who heard him mu# assent, < e that all the public misfortunes which the nation had already felt, and the many more which it was in all probability doomed to experience, were caused by the American war, ” which war was the native ofF - spring of ministeriar ignorance, obstinacy, and want of political principle ! It had for its ' immediate object the increa - sing the influence of the crown, and the power of the sovereign. It was conceived in ambition; it was nurtured by folly and rafhnefs; it was founded in ideas totally fbbverfive of the British confiitution; it was upjuft and wicked in the extreme; it was carried on with violence and want of prudence; and prosecuted in all its parts, with the rooft unrelenting and unheard of cruelties.

His Lordship confessed, in respect to the recovery of North America, he had been a very Quixote, and expected; because he raoft anxiously wished, that our colonies might - be prevailed upon to return to their former slate of connexion with this country. He had indeed pulhed his expectations further and longer, he believed ^ than any impartial person, informed of all the circUmstances both here and in America, the present administration exempted, ever had; —r - but his hopes had long since vanUhed. He had waked from those Vot, I. ' ftt dreams

PARLIAME NT AR Y A. 178 ^

dreams of British dominion, and every important consequence

which he flattered himself might be derived from them. But as in the course of what he ' might have urged in favour of thofc delusive hopes, and vain and idle ' expectations, some expressions of a loofe, general, and indeterminate riatufe, might have fallen from him, lie \vished to be perfe£tly understood. Much as he valued America; necessary as the posseffibn of the colonies might be to the power, glory, - dignity, and independence of Great Britain; fatal as her final separation would prove, whenever that event might take place; as - a friend to liberty, as a reverei; of the English constitution, as a lover of natural and political justice—t£ he would be much better plealed to fee ‘America for ever fevered from Great Britain, than restored to our possession by force of arms, 0 conqueR. ’ ’ He loved his country; he admired its politics institutions; but if her future greatnefs, power, and exten of dominion were only to be established and maintained oi the ruins of the constitution, he would be infinitely bette pleased to fee this country a free one, though curtailed ii power, wealth, &c. than possessing every thing the mof sanguine expectation could picture to itfelf, if her greatnef was to be purchased at the expence of her constitution am liberties.

To the injustice of the war, in every point of view in which he had considered it, his Lordship said he would de - fcend to such particulars as appeared to him to apply to tht present question, so far as it was a measure of expediency.

c < Look at New - York; what has been done there ? Nothing, orworfethan nothing; the commander in chief henii med in on New - York ifland, and its vicinities; not afinglc blow struck there for. these three last campaigns, nor in that part of America, but the shameful retreat from Philadelphia, when the General escaped with his whole army, rather by chance and the mrifconduCt of the enemy, than by the natural ability of the force under his command. Sir, Henry Clinton is a brave and experienced officer; but Sir Henry Clinton cannot perform impoffibilities. Three campaigns have passed away since, and nothing has been done but a few predatory excursions, which are a dilgracc to the array, a dilgrace to the counsels which have directed them, and, I may add, adifgrace to the whole English nation. Nay, in ? Read of gaining any advantages, or making any conquestj Rhode - Island has been abandoned; and if report may - be cre -

dited, the next measure will be that of abandoning New -

4 ' ' ' ' York,

A. ! lii. d e b a t E ' s. '

York, and then you will not have, a foot of land. huLC. aro -. lina, and what profpe£l : there is for retaining, that, I shall, as I proceed a little - further, take.. notice of I have, heard, from" tolerable good authority, that New - Yorlc must. be abandoned unless the.. requisition of the commander in chief be immediately complied with; and when, I tell you. r Lord - ?, ships what that, requisition is, such of; your Lordships as. have notbeem informed of it will think with me, that the evacuation of New York is unavoidable. Sir Henry Clin - : ton has wrjttenrhorrte for ten thousand men, and has.. added,. that he cannot stay lb as to answer any good purpose, f if that, reinforcement be not lent put to him early in, the spring, nor hie fears at all, if favourable circumstances should ante on the part of General Wafhington, l : uch as loans, further fuccoursfrom - France, - &c. Will ministers say that they are. preparing to : fend out such a reinforcement ? They know the contrary; they. dare not; —they cannot. What, ten thousand men !, 1 will - venture to maintain, and am able to prove, and I say it in the hearing of the noble Lord in the red ribbon, over the way ( Lord Amherst ) who if 1 am wrong has. it in his power to contradifl me, that to defend the whole ifland we have not. above fifteen thousand men, exclusive of the xiiilitia. If then, added to the threats of Franee and Spain, who I have ibroe reason to fear are meditating an attack on our. coasts, we may expe£t. a1 predatory war to be. carried on by Holland against the eastern. coasts of this kingdom; 1 believe it will - need very little argument, and lefs oratory, to satisfy the noble Lords Who hear me, that a length of near fifteen hundred miles of coast will call for the whole of this remnant of an army to defend it against; the eventual incurfions, debarkations, &c. which that very cir - cumftance alone may suggest to our enemies; a circumstance which they are no strangers to, though I flionld not, be fur -, prized to hear some noble Lords rile, and with a very grave, face. accuse me of conveying improper intelligence to the enemy. There vvas indeed a time when an army to defend us against our enemies was in a manner ufclels to us. I mean when we were in possession of the dominion of the sea, when we could with perfect security spare the last soldier to conquer in every, part, of the globe. Will noble Lords, t. ell me that that is the case now ? No ! I think not; —confident as jministers are, bold in his aftertions as the noble Farl over, [ the way, who presides at the head of the marine establish - jmentj is, he will hardly hazard the afierdon, when 1 say,

2, that

84 PARLIAMENT A It Y A i ? 8i.

that the dominion, not of the ocean, but of the narrow fe ^ s, our own very channel, was loft, when the French took ppf - session of it last summer was twelvemonth, and our flag for ever tarnished and difgraeed, when our channel fleet took shelter in Portsmouth harbour, and secured itfelf by flight from a superior and pursuing enemy. What has been the di/grace which has lately happened ? The noble Earl may take it either way. We were not in force to meet the enemy in the Bay, but permitted them to convoy one of the richeft and most valuable trade fleets that ever entered into the ports of France, without so much as an attempt to interrupt them or being superior to D ’ Eftaing, our ministers, in their usual bungling, ' incapable. manner, gave orders to the commander of the British squadron not to rifque a battle.

“ This is a circumftarice no lei ' s melancholy than disgrace - ful. I speak only from public report : admimstration are censurable at all events; if the newspapers may be depended on, which form the great source of intelligence recommended to your Lordships by the noble Vifcourtt in the green ribbon ( Stormont. ). ‘

“ Be these circumstances as they may, I believe there is not one of your Lordships who is not fully perfuaded, that Franee and Spain, without Holland, are an over - match for us at sea; and consequently, that the defence of this ifland Tefts entirely upon the militia and the army— - army, did I say ? We have no army; our army is in fa& ruined; it is indeed totally annihilated. The noble Lord in the red ribbon knows it; and if he opens his mouth at all on the subjeff, I con - I tend must, and I dare say will, acknowledge it; and I will j tell your Lordships why, and how it has been ruined. It is I the railing new corps that has ruined it. The recruiting fer - I vice is at an end; it is no more. Men cannot be had. Why so ? The very means to augment it has been the cause; and j the motive for adopting the measure of the new levies, a most infamous and destrudtive one, must stare every one of your Lordships in the face. What is it ? subaltern officers, men j who never saw service, and some of whom never handled a I fpontoon, are made field officers, or are promoted to regiments f and battalions. The recruiting service is become a down - j right money tranla&ion; a mere piece of brokerage ! A \ person Who has interest with the minister, undertakes to raise I a certain number of men. How does he do it ? He purchases ( it—not for a specific sum —No ! he. purchases it with a cer - ) tain number of men; and he purchases those men again, at j

' ' a n ofU

i

a; 1781. DEBATES.

amost exorbitant price .; thus this riew - dubbed colonel goes to market with a full purse, and Outbids every man; buys every man whom he can tempt to enlistj no matter what his age, infirmities, orunfitnefs forservice may be. - If an. officer recruiting for the old corps, in the regular established mode of service, comes in competition with the recruiting serjeants of these new corps, he stands not the leaft chance; he is laughed at. This is not all - —the men are enlisted under the idea of flaying within the kingdom, Ministers, ignorant and incapable as they are, know better than to trust the defence of the kingdom to such men. Arts are resorted to, and proportions made, and temptations held out to those soldiers to embark for foreign service. Attend then, my Lords : thele new corps are sent, without either discipline. or knowing the right end of a rnufket, to unhealthy climates, where they pe - rish daily by hundreds. I have heard, from good authority, that out of one of the belt of those regiments lately sent to Jamaica [ supposed to mean Cary’s corps ] confiftirig of up - vvards of a thoufaind men, not more than 97 survived, or if alive, were fit to do duty. Another great inconvenience arising from this mode, of recruiting is, that the old corps are thereby tendered totally ineffective, which has at length compelled the commander in chief to come to a regulation, that of reducing the companies to 56 men each; and yet, low as this eftalMifhm6ht is, the old corps are considerably defective, and the ariny we have to defend us is composed chiefly of officers which is exaCtly the reverfe of the conduCt of one of the greatest captains of this, or any other preceding age, the King of Prussia, who has no ', more than three commissiondf officers to every hundred and fifty men. Befides the weak - nefs of such an establishment, which ought to be the first ob - je£t, it is a great additional expence, and at the conclusion of a peace, must be the means of loading the nation, and en - creasing the Half - pay lift to an enormous amount.

“ I thought it not improper to point out to your Lordships the numerous evils which the mode adopted of railing new levies has been productive of, and shall now return : I say, that you have no fleet able to face your enemies. I maintairt that you have no army even equal to the home defence; and I am author ! fed to conclude, from these premises, that America, even according to the idea of ministers, is loft beyond even any thing refembling probable expectation, because yo\i cannot spare the reinforcement thought ncceifary by the

commander

P ARL I AM. E NOTARY Ar ^ K

commander in chief for currying on successful operations, during the ensuing campaign. r; :

( < But if the northern, and middle parts, rof the colonies be. abandoned, what profpe < £t,. Ji$ve '; yoUt. to, tdiq, southward ? A, very poor one indeed i - I know the officeryvho command ^ there; I love him; I; ad mi re; him I - revere hii ^ i. f We have, been old. friends and brother soldiers. We feryed under the, fame‘great; master at, an early period of our lives [ supposecl to, mean Pripce Ferdinand, of Brunswick ]. : I, am lorry I cannot say that I profited much by that. great officer’s in - ffi£&ions or example. I know that Lord Cornwallis is no lefs zealous, than a brave, - active, arid judicious officer. My. perfpnai esteem for, his j Lordship makes me lament some things which have happened. I know that he is no lefs humane than brave; and I, am therefore inclined to prefume, that the cruelties and feveritips exercised in his name, and under his authority, never originated with him ., I am perfuaded, his mind is of another texture; that he never. could have a£led upon his own judgment, when he licensed or, authorised those severities but. he. has been obliged to comply with the orders received from hence. It : fills my mind with, horror, and I tremble for the consequences, when, I know the refentments and deteftatfon it wilL create in the minds of the people of America; and, if possible, still more, when I reflect on the, melancholy Situation of thq. fe. brave and gallant officers and soldiers, who, to all the necessary toils and perils of war,; will be subject to fall victims to what their enemies will deem a just and necessary retaliation; just in its principle, and neceff fary in its obje&, in order to put an end to the wantpn ef - fusion qfhuman blood .,.

But what is the iituation of Lord Cprnwallis ? Wliy, afteran exertion, which must do him infinite honour; after a combina : tion of circurastances, improved, by a. series of condu£t, which the greatest veteran officer might be ' proud of; he totally defeated the enemy. But what. then ? For want of force, he has been obliged ever since to act. upon the defensive, initeadbf the o ^ enfive, A very considerable - part o. f his army, has been, fur - prized, and the whole either taken prisoners, killed, or dispersed; so that by. this time, in all probability, his Lordship has been compelled to retire to Charles - Town, and relinquifh all the advantages which he had good reason to promife himself from the victory at Camden, or is. waiting for. reinforcements from New - York. This, in my opinion, is the state of your affairs in America; and by what I can learn from the newspapers,

I •,. '. ..

| AV1781. D E BAT; E‘ S. -

! papers‘9 for I ( peak ' upon ' no hettev authority, theerxpedition I under General Leflie has Failed, 1 or worfe than failedfor though the Generalirhet with little or no oppofitibn in Yir -; ginia, the manifeft spirit and dispofltion of the ? inhabitants i of that provirice : portends fomethingmd lefs fatal than actual; defeat. The people, I understand, fled on all - fldes for want of I prote&ion; but not a lingle person, after all the predictions of : a noble Lord in the other House [ supposed to mean Lord George I Germain ] came in under the royal standard, or claimed; the benefit or prote&ion held out by the proclamation.

Taking therefore the whole of the American war, as coni ' nefted with the present question, which, if I understand right,

; is the only pretence for the manifefto on your Lordships i table, I look upon America as already loft, as already irre - i coverably loft

( t The noble Viscount in the green ribbon has predi&ed : many signal advantages which will be derived from the pre - lent rupture with Holland. He tells you that they will be stunned into their senses. I allure his Lordship that I much \ fear that they will. I fear that the Hollanders will feel the; just sense they entertain of our unprovoked violence and" pi - \ ratical acts; for I shall never consider the captures made of; their ftiips, in a time of profound peace, in any other light, j I fear they will feel the most warm and well founded refent - j ments, and that those feelings will suggest the most vigorous I and effectual means of resistance and retaliation. The noble j Viscount builds mightily upon their unprepared state, on their i inability to defend themselves, or act offenfively. He fays I that their coasts and floating property are at our mercy; he I fays, that their subjects in the East and West - Indies are totally unapprized of the approaching rupture, and that they are of I courfenaked and defencelels. I suspe£I the noble Lord to be I as ignorant of the expediency of the war, as he seems to be I totally miftaken respecting the justice of it. Does the noble I Lord know what state of defence the Dutch possessions in the eastern and weftern world are ? I think I may venture to af - I fert, his Lordship knows exaflly as much concerning that,

1 as he does of the spirit and disposition of the people whom I we are about to contend with. The Dutch, though acom - 1 mercial, are nevertheless a brave and courageous people. They I have ever opposed tyranny in every shape it has fhevvn itfelf,

I and perhaps in their first struggles against Spauifh cruelty and ISpanifti oppression, manifefted proofs of magnanimity, cou - 1 lage, and heroifm, not surpassed if equalled by the most ceil lebrated

7

P A R LI A M E N T AR Y A, 1781.

Jebrated and renowned nations of ancient or modern times. I need not deduce a series of facts, in confirmation of what I now assert : the hiftory of the two Dutch wars in the reign of Charles II. affords sufficient proofs not to mention many instance ^ of a later date, during the reigns. of King William and Queen Anne, The Dutch, it is true, are merchants, and sea - faring people by profession; but it is well known, that we have, as well as France, transformed them into seamen, and soldiers, when oppression and injustice rendered it necessary for them to bear up and refill their enemies and oppref - fors.

The Dutch are still the fame people; it is true they have all their war establishments to arrange and new model, that they want naval officers; but give me leave to say, not in the degree that persons uninformed may imagine : as I under - Hand, that several officers of that nation are now in the service of some of the naval powers of Europe, and will of course be called home to defend their country; yet granting the argument of a want of experienced officers to be pufiied to its greatest extent, what does it amount to ? No more than a temporary want. Unlefs in the single instance of the short naval experience gained in the contest with this country during the Protectorate, the people of Holland had remained in a state of profound peace for more than half a century; yet when the war broke out in the year 1665 with England, there appeared no want of able officers and ikiiful commanders. The faCt was, that almost every man in the commonwealth became a soldier or a seaman; nay, persons totally unfit, by habit and profession, flood forth and changed the gown for the sword. Among the rest, the great Cornelius De Witt took upon himself the command of a grand squadron, and j fought one of the most bloody naval battles which happened j during that war.

“ The noble. Lord, as I have observed before, supposes that the possessions of Holland must fall; but I cannot fee by what means. If they should fall, they must surrender from choice, not neceffity; for while France and Spain continue to remain matters in the European Teas, the Dutch cannot pofiibly have any thing to fear at home, and 1, believe, as little out of Europe as in it. We have already too much business on our hands, and though we had fleets to spare, where are the troops necessary for the prosecuting offenfive operations ? The truth is, it is we, that ought to be alarmed for our possessions, not Holland for theirs; and should Hoi -

A. 1711. ii e U A T k

land unite with France and Spain in attacking us in the East or West - Indies, I cannot fee, instead of meditating conquest, ' how it will be possible for us tb maintain our own dominion ' s out of Europe. ”

His Lordfliiphaving very fully urged these points, ’ in order to prove the inexpediency of the measure shewing how unequal we were even to cope with the enemies we had already to contend with, further maintained his general argument upon the probable eonduCt of the northern or neutral powers, particularly the probable conduct of the Empress of Ruffia who he believed would consider herfelf as bound by pofitive, or implied engagements, to assist Holland, thus trea - cheroufly attacked; not on account of a pretended treaty; not excxuted under any authority, nor ratified even by the authority under which it was framed, but really for having entered into a neutrality proposed by the Court of PeterlburgE to Holland, and the other ' powers of Europe not engaged iri V ? ar. He should not be surprised to hear similar arguments to those used by the noble Viscount in the green ribbon, urged with all imaginable solemnitv and confidence; ce that it was

t O j

not the interest of the Ruffian court to break with us; that it would be unjuft, and impolitic; that honesty was the best policy that it would be madnels in the Court ofPeterfburgh td involve themselves wantonly in the quarrel; and to the last degree ungenerous in us, so much as to harbour such afufpiciori; &c, &c. ” He remembered very well, not long since, to have heard the noble Viscount assign the lame realons exaCHy respecting Holland, at the very time, according to his Lord - ship’s account of this day, they were actually entering iiitd a treaty with our own subjects, as an independent sovereigii state; after, as a noble Lord observed [ Chesterfield ] they had given protection to a rebel pirate [ Jones ]; after they had been aififting our subjects in open arms against our authority, with ammunition, stores, and all the implements of war. When this kind of reasoning —when this ftiie of argument which applied equally to no case, and every case was resorted to, he wished noble Lords to give it that degree of weight, attention, and credit exaCtly which it deserve - d. He had heard, indeed, the noble Viscount make ule of the fame arguments before Spain declared and before that period in respect of France. He heard his Lordship do the fame while Holland was acting the hoftile and unfriendly pzirt which His Lordship had described in Inch strong and vehement tertiis, which, he said, so defervediy. merited the most exemplary chaftisement, and Vot I. N which

PARLIAMENTARY A 1781,

which, was the only colour of argument that could beopposed to the probability that Ruffia would eventually become an. enemy in the present quarrel with Holland, as a member of the armed neutrality. But in this, as well as every other in - stance, in which the dignity, reputation, and most elTential in - •terefts of the country were concerned, what were the documents to which their Lordships were referred ? They were rdefired to trust and put their whole confidence and reliance upon—what ? —upon the English newspapers and the Dutch gazettes 1 To answer miniflers then. upon their own authority —If either might be depended on, the Dutch had already acceded to the neutrality in due form, by their miniflers sent to the Court of Peterfburgh for that purpose; and the Einprefs in due form accepted of their acceftion. So that instead of France, Spain, America and Holland, we should shortly have Ruflia, and in due time all the other members of the armed neutrality, to contend with, and of course every neutral naval power in Europe, Portugal excepted, combined or unnecef - j farily drove into meaiures which must from the nature of such a confederate force, employed against us, ultimately terminate in our total destruction, if not annihilation, as a sovereign, independent Hate. Even Portugal began. to shew a disposition extremely unfavourable to our interests, and he had good reason to believe. ihe would, in the end, prove as inimical as the rest; a predicament hitherto unexampled in the hiftory of mankind, that of not having a single port open to us from Gibraltar to the North Pole.

He perceived that the noble Viscount laid particular stress upon the treachery of Holland; that is, he took the matter relative to the treaty, upon prefumption, to be true, and afterwards drewconclufions from that prefumption equally ill - founded. He laid, the Dutch had notonlybeen guilty of an aggression, but that their ill - condu£l was highly aggravated, because they committed the act while they claimed the privileges annexed to a ftatc, of prefumed alliance and friendship. j To the fa& he had already spoken; on the conclulion dravvnj from its supposed existence, he would just oblerve, that the alliance between this country and Holland was no more; it was vacated by the very perfo ' ns who stated the act as a breach of faith. The present let of ministers had themselves declared the subsisting treaties between Great Britain and Holland to be dissolved by a paper delivered by Sir Joseph Yorke to the States General in the year 1779, and yet had ' the modelty to accuse Holland ‘ of a breach of treaty no longer in being,

Howevel

t

| A. 1781 DEBATES.

| However light ministers might make of this formal renunci -

I ation, or artful they might : he in their attempts to gloss it 1 over, that circumstanee might be productive of more serious consequences than they forefavv, or were willing to acknow -. ledge ., ' If Holland was free from her former engagements to Great Britain, most clearly jfhe flood in respect of us as the other neutral powers of Europe did, which of course entitled her to form fresh engagements with any other power she pleased, or to accede to the armed neutrality for the protection of her commerce; consequently, if the universal report was true, that Holland had acceded, she would moil certainly be entitled to every protection, security, and privilege enjoyed, or to be claimed by the rest of the contracting parties, namely, Ruffia, Sweden, and Denmark.

The Lord Chancellor rofe as soon as the last noble speaker Lord ! fat down, and observed, that it was by no means his inten - ctUor, \ tion to travel after the noble Lord through the very wide and extensive circle he had been pleased to delcribe—from; Quebec toNew - York, thence to Carolina; in shorr, over every foot of ground in North America, now under the immediate dominion of the British Crown, or which was withheld from us by force of arms by our foreign enemies, or rebellious subjects. He was as little dil ' posed to trace the footsteps of the noble Lord nearer home, from Gibraltar to France, and so on to Holland, Ruffia, Sweden, Denmark,

&c. If, however, in the course of what he had to submit to their Lordships, any point should strike him, or any cir - cumftance recur to his mind in which he should have the misfortune to differ from the noble Earl, he would think it his duty to take notice of it. He was perfedly aware of his own msufficiency to contend with the noble Lord in the great line of politics. His studies had been direCted another way. When therefore he found himself under a neceffity, arising from conviClionj to controvert the noble Lord’s arguments, conclusions, or opinions, he should do it with that degree of diffidence which became a person under the predicament in which he mufl be luppoied to Hand; he would, nevertheless, declare. his own sentiments fairly. and without relerve, deeming it the hrft duty incumbent upon him, as well as every noble Lord who heard him, to lpeak or aft upon tho ' fe motives and reasons only which had. brought home conviction to his own mind.

His Lordship. observed, that the question which in the event of the present debate he would b. e called upon to put

N 2. to

$3

Char. -

9 ? PARLIAMENTARY A. i7S ?

to their Lordships, and which of course they would be called ', upon to decide, was simply this : < e Whether the motion, made by the noble Lord in the green ribbon, being a pro - poled address in answer to his Majestyls meffage; or the motion made by the noble Duke early in the evening, should fjrft receive their Lordships ? approbation This brought the point really and truly in discussion, in his opinion, within a very narrow compass; for mofl clearly it was in that shape, and that shape only, the queflion presented itfelf to their ’ Lordships, however loaded and confounded it might have been with collateral and extraneous : matter, or ably difcuf - fed by several noble Lords who had expressed their difappro - hation of the queflion originally moved. To that point he should specifically direst what he now had to offer, reserving to himself whatever his own ideas might suggest, in reply, or observation upon many things which had fallen from th. ofe noble Lords in the course of the debate.

What then was the state of the queflion on this ground ?; His Majesty had sent a meffage by a noble Lord high in office, accompanied with certain papers. The former ac7 quaints their Lordships, that his Majesty found it necessary to direct letters of marque and reprifal to be issued against the Du, tch nation; the latter contains an account of certain transa£iions ' which passed between our minister at the Hague and the States General, which induced his Majesty to adopt that measure. Now in point of precedent he believed there was not a single inflance in jthe records of Parliament in which any other matter was permitted to be introduced be -, tween the answer to a royal meffage and the determination of the House upon its contents. ' It appeared, as far as he could jearnj and if he was mistaken ' he expected he should be fe{ rights that rjo precedent of the kind ' exited to the contrary, but ' that the custoni or ufage ’ of Parliament had at alt times, and upon ‘ every occafjon, "given this decided ' preference to intimations, meffages, ’ arid communications from the throne. Yet iuppofing that the preterit case was totally a new one, that from its ' nature, novelty, ' or importance, it was entitled to be taken out o ' f the general rqle, "the arguments urged in favor of the exception he prefumed should be sufficientj. y cogent and concfufive to flaevv that it came under that descrip - tion. :. f

This led him to the principal, nay the only ground or ar - < gument on which the noble Duke’s motion was attempted to j be maintained. It ' had been ' said that the documents on the !

’ ' •. .. .. .. ... ' 5;. .. .. .. ” table}

A. 1781, D E B ' A T E S.

^ ble were not such as justified the - measure; : canlequently, that either other papers ought to be laid before the House, to satisfy; their Lordships that the real facts and transactionS justified the measure; or, that the meffage upon the documents fubnaitted to the House ' was not such as entitled it to their Lordships ’ concurrence.

It. would be very needlefs, he prefumed, to prefs the answer to this mode of reasoning to its full extent, the ufage being clearly against it; but the argument urged to induce ^ - the House to depart from this general rule is this that the papers being deficient, the whole matter will ultimately be decided upon should their Lordships now consent to agree to the adarefs, and those noble Lords who disapprove of the measure, as grounded upon the letters on the table, will hereafter be for ever precluded, or barred from giving any opinion on the subject, being bound by the forms of Parliament to the approbation of the present measure. though not justified by the documents upon the table.

Were this the real case, he confessed, that the uniform acquiescence in melfages from the throne, or rather the preference such meffages always had in the contemplation of Parliament, would, on many accounts, prove extremely inconvenient, and be subversive of that expelled and wilhed for unanimity, so necessary to the successfully conducting and carrying on the hufinefs of government. But lie begged leave to say, that was not the case; nor did such approbation, as precedent had established respecting royal commu - nications, bind in substance such noble Lords as were only bound in form, and who had ' acquiesced merely in compliance with the customary mode of parliamentary proceeding; jFor every noble Lord who thought the information on the table defective or incomplete, relative to the justice or expediency of the measure, would be as. much at liberty to rnove for further information, as if he had never given a vote on the subject. He wo\ild neither be precluded nor bound by his vote of this day, but might, as soon as the present question was disposed of, or at any future or more lit or convenient time, rife and move for any papers he thought proper.

On the ground, therefore, of established ufage and uninterrupted precedent, he should most certainly be against letting in the motion made by the noble Duke, in order to give it a preference to an add refs moved in answer to a royal meffage. It was a respect due to the crown which had never

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

been refufed. In another point of view it amounted to a negative; it was a motion to poftpone in the first instance, in the way of a previous question, if he understood it right, and, in faC, might be considered as a refusal on the part of their Lordships; for certainly, if the noble Duke’s Question should be carried, it would imply, or directly import a degree of censure on the measure. It would amount to this; that his Majesty had exercised his prerogative of declaring war without just cause; or if he had a just cause, had declined to inform their Lordships of his real motives; either of which, in his opinion, would have been extremely inder cent and improper.

When he made ufe of his Majesty’s name, he wished to be understood as holding the language of Parliament and the constitution. Whatever steps had been taken, could be onr ly imputed to his ministers. They were their acts for which they were responfible, and by which they alone must abide. Nevertheless, though they were liable to be called to an account at a future time, and in a proper manner, the conducing of the affairs of government made it absolutely necessary that the trust committed to their care should be prefumed to have been faithfully and properly discharged, till the contrary were proved : besides, it would be im - poilible to conduC the affairs of the nation for a Angle day, if the advisers of the crown were to be employed in defending their conduct at the very instant it was announced. The crown, it was acknowledged, had the power of declaring peace and war; so far its advisers had a£led under authority respecting the present measure; if that power had been un - fkillfully or corruptly exercised, those who had advised his Majesty would be still as amenable to the judgment and censure of Parliament, if they should be found to delerve it, as if no such vote as that proposed by the noble Viscount had ever received the approbation of the House.

His Lordship having argued this point very ably, which, in his opinion, was clearly decisive of the question immediately before the House, said, that he thought it his duty to take notice of several matters which had been strenuously urged by some noble Lords near him.

He observed, with much pain, that noble Lords, not contented with condemning the measures of administration as they were supposed to affect the interests of the nation, had indufttiouily called their capacity into question, mixing, at the fame time, strong personal allusions relative to their iup ?

. A. i7&u. P E B A T E S.

posed want of integrity, as well as talents; and in fine, upon many occasions general and specific, imputing their conduct. to, motives originating equally in weaknefs and wickedyiefs. They did not even flop short there in their personal inve£Hves attacks; they confounded and transferred the prefumed delinquency of individuals to government itfelf. c The government was upheld by corruption; the measures advised by ministers were wicked and unjuft. ’ A necessary resistance to the infidious attempts of our enemies was branded with the odious names of piracy, robbery, rapine, and public. plunder. He was sorry to hear such language in that House; he felt most disagreeably, upon a variety of accounts, which he should just slightly mention,. and upon none more than the notorious indecency of such expressions. He ever thought, and ever should continue to think, ' that even independent of the established order of their Lordffnps ’ proceedings, that no language ought to be used in ' that House, but what might pass current among any other society of gentlemen; and it hurt him greatly when he saw that rule departed from. These general inve£fcives, no matter from which fide of the House they came, had a particular evil tendency; they were pro -. duftive of bad example, and he believed those who used theni. frequently felt the inconveniences resulting from them, being free to declare, that he believed they were in general ill - founded, on which fide soever they came, or to which fide soever they weire applied : and he once for all appealed to the noble Lords themselves, whether they were not conscious of the injustice of the imputations thus thrown out ? He would upon this head just add, that he hoped noble Lords near him would give him ' credit, when he disclaimed any intention of a partial application of the remark : —he made it with no such intention, he wished the observation to apply indifcri - minately for the purpose of reaching every part of the Ploufe, or not at all; for he folemrily protested, that he thought the abuses daily thrown out upon them without doors, were equally false and ill - founded with those to which custom had given a kind of sanction within. —He hoped therefore, as well in regard. of the high rank they bore in the state, and the respect which was due from each individual Lord to the other, as for the fake of example, that noble Lords would abstain from every thing which bordered on a stile of afpe - rity and accusation, and from criminatory and recriminatory exprefiions, which while they tended to disgrace and lelTon the weight and dignity of their Lordships deliberations,

• field

5$6 PARLIAMENTARY A. ijSi,

. held out an encouragement to the lower orders of the peo ' pie to tranigrefs in the fame manner *

Government, said ioftie nOble Lords, is upheld by corruption/. T ^ say no wor. fe, this was not a language fit to be held in that House, because the majority of that Horife hitherto supported the rneafures which had beeh thus strongly cen - fiifed It implied an accusation of a very heavy nature, ’ not directed exciufiyely\ against minifiers “The language of ' debate, where minifteis only could be afieifted by charges of ' this nature, admitting of a latitude of Ipeech might in forae ^ measure be allowable, and in ' some possible cases not improper, but when this was puffied further against those who supported the measures, as well as the minifiers who devised ‘ them, it amounted to an accusation of a very serious nature, and was therefore, in his opinibn, extremely indecent, and totally unjuftifiable, V unlefsthofe who urged them were ready prepared to prove the truth of their afiertions. —; ft was expressly, if he rightly comprehended the arguments, raised. upon such random *, aSTertions, meant to bear upon their Lord - ships as well as the immediate agents and actors; —he meant the minifiers who Recommended the measures, and the noble Lords who supported them, and who were in the instance to which he was alluding charged directly with corruption, or of being influenced by corrupt motives. He should submit the impropriety of urging charges of fod eep arid criminal a complexion, which from their nature were fodifficult to berefuted, and so easy to be made, even without a possibility of detection; but what proofs did noble Lords deduce in the support of those accusations ? None at all. They contented themselves with urging them in loofe, indefinite terms, and thereby endeavoured to involve government in a general odium, and of course to add embarrafiments to those which naturally attend every government in time of war, and this in particular, now labouring under peculiar circumstances of difficulty and distress perhaps such as were never before experienced by any other nation.

If noble Lords meant, that their accusations should pass for no more than their current and intrinfic value, upon the ! general idea, that every opposition to government is always well founded, and that every administration is equally in the ' wrong; that every opposition arises from found patriotic, and every administration is carried on by the means of corruption, the matter would hardly deferye a Single animad verlion. That, in the prefers instance, was riot the case ;

4 Par '

A. i > 8t. DEBATES.

particulars had been tiated; specific charges had been made; Ministers ' had not only been accused of weaknefs wickednefs, arid corrupt motives, but the effects of their ChhduCt had been painted in the ftrorigeft. and most overcharged dolours respecting foreign powers; the injuflice of their conduCt towards Holland had been held forth under the description of piracy and public robbery. This country had been loudly and confidently affirmed to be in a state of imben eility. > Her councils described to be weak and wicked; and her power of resistance, or offensive operation, totally annihilated : —that is, bur enemies are told, that we have made war upon them from the worst motives, and after enflaming their passions, they are invited to do themselves justice against a people, so far from being formidable as an offenlive enemy, j as to be totally unable to defend themselves. He would, fub - I mit to their Lordships, whether this was a language tit to I be used ? whether it was prudent, or politic ? or whether *

I to balance the great evil it might be probably productive of,

| it promifed, or could promife any advantage ? — - There

| was betides a very obvious conclution, which might be fairly 1 drawn from this ffcile of argument and accusation, that it laid a foundation for a claim of a monopoly of all the public I virtue and talents in the kingdom; he wa % as ready to ac -

I knowledge, as any of the noble Lords might be to make their claims to public virtue and talents; but surely, their own good sense, their difeernment, and their candour, would alL unite in inducing them not to exclude the just pretentions of others.

. It was not even the bad effects of what he had been animadverting on within, those walls, or. elsewhere, within the ifland, which was the reafbri of expressing so anxiously his wifhes that nothing of the kind had passed. Experience had convinnced him, in a variety of instarices, that every thing of consequence which passed iri that House soon made its way to the Continent, and was turned to our disadvan - tage, arid in fotrie instances had been productive of the most fatal confluences ., He flattered himself, that at so critical a juncture as the present, every discourse which might in its tendency either lead7to put our enemies on their guard, or serve to direct their attacks against the weak or vulnerable ' plaits of the empire, would have been carefully abstained from. He had indeed prefumed to give an hint of that kind early : in the day and - hoped that noble Lords would endeavour as much as possible to steer clear of extraneous - Von I O mattep

PARLIAMENTARY A. I78f.

untter, and confine themselves to the question; The presentlituation of this country was far front, being a deferable one. Unanimity was most devoutly to be wiflted for; if that however could not be attained, it was, in his opinion, no, very unreasonable expectation to have formed, that noble Lords would refrain and avoid with all possible caution the touching upon matters which might in their nature serve to put our enemies on their guard, or infpire them with expectations of vi&ory and success, on a confidence of our weakness or inability, either to annoy them, or defend ourselves.

Several arguments, he observed, had been" urged to prove the injustice and precipitancy of the resolution of issuing letters of marque and reprifa ). He fhoukl consider them lepa - rately, not in the order in which they were urged, but as they had struck his memory, and that in the shortefl manner, and fewefl words he was capable of expressing himself.

Three points had been specially infilled on, in order to prove the injuflice of our conduct towards Holland; one was, that the treaty on the table was not binding on the republic, or any part or parcel of it; the second, although it had been binding on the province of Holland, that the aggression could not be considered as an ad of” the Hate, or the seven United Provinces; and lallly, that the treaty was neither acknowledged or ratified, hecause. it was no more than a project to be taken up and carried, or not carried into execution, upon some future day, merely at the free will of the contracting or negotiating parties : still later in the debate it had been said by a noble Lord [ Shelburne ] that whether eventually binding, or not binding, it was not to take effect till after a certaip contingency, namely, till after our. rebel subjects, described in the instrument or treaty on the table under the appellation of the United States of America, should be declared independent; and consequently, till that event should take place, which might never happen, the treaty could not be confi - 1 dered in faCt, or even in deduction, to be in an existing state. I

To each of those arguments he should as well as he was I able endeavour to give an answer, and shape it in such a manner, as. to apply it direCtiy to the mere matter, Carefully abftatning from any personal or. extraneous obfer - va. tions; but merely, confining hiinfelf - tbThe proper subje$ of debate. ... ;

He - was confciou$ of his great. inferiority to the noble Lord who spoke last, in respect of the talents and informa ' j tion necessary to enable him to contend with his Lordfhb jn points of poiitjcal. difculEon i his pursuits and habits led. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. anothel

A. 1781. DEBATES.

another way, and by no means fitted him for such an undertaking. For this reason, if for no other, he would treat the subject in that stile of argument, which the portion of common sense and experience Providence had endued him with would enable him, and would farhiliarize it in such a manner, as to bring it on a level with his own poor underftanding, as well as that of others, who not having the abilities or opportunities of the noble Lord, were willing to content themselves with exercising those talents, however flender, in coming to a judgment and determination upon a subjecI :, which their situation in that House, and the duty annexed to it, expressly called upon them to give on

the present occasion. - All he could undertake topromife

for himself, if he should come to an unwife or improper determination, was, that it ' should be an act, not of the intention; that is, if he was wrong, it should be with an intention to a < 5b right; and if in the event he should form a; wrong judgment, he should have at leaft the private satis - faction, in his own mind, of imputing it toils true cause, a j real inability to form a true one.

His Lordship observed, that many curious arguments had been resorted to, for the purpose of proving the injustice of the mealure. It had been urged, in the first place, that the treaty found in Mr. Laurens’s papers was no more than a Iketch, proposition, or plan, to be hereafter considered, but in its present state by no means binding even upoirthe contracting parties themselves, much lefs upon those whom ( at leaft otie of them ) /. e. Holland, had no authority to bind. —Secondly, it had been strongly piefled by the noble Lord who spoke last, that though the treaty had been just what it imported to be, a treaty between the Seven United Provinces and the delegate or representative of our rebellious subjects in arms, it was nevertheless perfeCHy harmlefs and jinnoften - five in its nature; because it was not to take effect, but upon a contingency which might never take place, and if it should take place, would leave the States or Republic of Holland at liberty, in common with the other powers of Europe, to enter into a treaty with America, as she or they would

I with any other sovereign or independent state. —He meant, as the noble Lord had explained it, —“ When this country shall have acknowledged the independency of America. ”

He should not maintain his argument upon the claim of existing alliances; he. should not describe the secret treaty as an act of treachery or breach of public faith, and a violation of public friendship. —He meant, to eonfider the, act, as

O a it

100

PARLIAMENTARY

it might be supposed to affect two independent Bates, who Bood upon, terms of mutual amity, and who bore no further relation, nor were no otherwise bound to each other, than as acknowledging the general dominion, or force of the law of nations. —Looking therefore, upon Great Britain, and the Seven United. Provinces bound to each other by this cornm ^ n tie and relation he had described, he wiflied their Lordfhjps, tp reded !, only for a moment, and fee fairly and impartially how the case flood

A very considerable part of the subjects of the British emr : pire rebel against the sovereign power, and by open arms endeavour to /hake off the dominion of the eBablished government; and another power pending the conte/l, u e. Holland, does what ? They enter into negotiation, and actually sign a treaty of commerce with the rebels thus described. If this was not a moll notorious aggression on the part of Holland, He was totally at a loss to know what could be denominated an aggression; and for this express reafpn, if for no other, “ that it violated the very first principles of national good faith, and of the establi/heddaws which; mutually bind sovereign and independent Bates inv their conduct towards their relpeclive subjects. ” It was a farce to talk, of a proje6l, or a plan; the very infiant this projedl or plan; was signed it became a treaty; the tenor of the inBrument spoke for itfelf; the terms of it were explicit and absolute, and declared the fixed intentions of the contradling parties in, every paragraph. There was not a single condition Bated or implied, but the one he was juB about to offer a short : ob - iervation or two upon, which was, “ that the treaty was not to take place, till after our rebel subjects Biould be declared independent. ”

It was totally unnecefiary to trouble their Lordships upon this ground, unless it were expressly maintained, that the whole of the queff ion of the juBice or injuBice of the measure turned upon that single point. To prefs it in argument as part, of the case, or by way of extenuation, was idle : if, on : the contrary, noble Lords were ready to make it the great basis on which the queBion was to be discussed; he was ready to meet them upon that ground. The contingency, that so considerable a part of our rebel subjects in arms were to be declared independent, was a prefumption in itfelf of the most infolent and aggravated nature, and plainly pointed to an encouragement to our rebel, subjects to periilt in their revolt or rebellion. It spoke this language, or it imported nothing.

“ We will give ypu every secret affiBance in our power '; we.

will

. Av i7#i. D E B. A : T E S. % 0$

will dissolve, or worfe than dillblve, all ouf : engagements ? with the power you are at w; ar vrith. .. We will, in like manner, promote the views of your new ally, the French King j; and as by those means you will probably be. enabled to throw off - the natural allegiance and political obedience yon owe - thn Crown and Parliament of Great Britain, when by our secreti assistance, &c. you. shall; have happily attained your ends, > ve shall then faithfully perform the terms of this treaty now executed. ’ V

That this interpretation was agreeable to common fenle,

supported by common experience, he was ready to submit for their Lordships; nay, he would venture to affirm, that there; was not a man. alive, who thought freely and impartially on thesubjecl; who, could put so great a violence on his un - v derllanding,. as. to perfuade himself,. or. others, thatf the treaty was not a compleat treaty in all its par. ts, and; not a project :, ', or mere leading, proportion; or, - that the condition, bf contingency to which; the, treaty was poftponed, was any more > than, a ii > ere trick to eyade the consequences, which one oft the contracting ! parties wiihedi to avoid if it - was.. torbe. car ^ ried. into immediate executionnaVnely, an inllant. declaration of war upon the part of this country.

Another argument was specioully urged, and much infilled ? upon by, the noble Lord to whose arguments he was now particularly alluding. He heard - that. noblej - LPvd with; plea -. ', lure. His LordOiip. was so well ' informed, ' and; spoke so ably upon every fubjp® he rofe to, thathe - always attended to whatever camp from his, Lordship with no lefs attentiopithan. rqverencp. He. bowed to his Lord/h - ip’s authority upon aim oft : every. occasion, and; when he differed from the noble - Lord, he was ready to attribute it to a want ' of capacity inhimself. But however circumferibed his own talents might be, in matters of difficulty hewasbpundinc. bnfciencetofollqwwheneverthey led; satisfiedthaf ripthinglliprtof conviction ought tooperate foas to indupe him to Jcome ' to, any solemn opinion upon a subject of such magnitude, and importance. He was sorry to be obliged to totally differ from the noble Lord. Several arguments,. jin extenuation of tlfe conduct of the States General of the

United Provinces, had been urged by the noble Lord ., to de - raonllrate, that, the treaty on the table, from the particular frame and constitution of the Dutch republic, would not admit of; the satisfaction. demanded by Sir Joseph. Yorke from the States General, respecting the contents of that very offend ve paper, vr He was yet to learn, that either direCtly or indiredly,. the answer given. to our :; ambaftador of poftponing.

to PARLIAMENTARY; A. 1781,

the explanation ad referendum, or the arguments fifed by the noble Lord, as to the constitution of the Dutch republic; contained the leaft shadow of apology or justification : so far from it that he was clearly convinced, if no other point were corifidered, the condu6t of the States General, in that par - ’ ticular alone, justified the iffaing the manifefto.

He was ready, in argument, to give up all. - he had beetr hitherto contending for. He was ready to grant, that the treaty was no more than a project, and that the contingency, as to the time it was to take effect, softened the project, though it had been a treaty and took the sting out of it. Yet still the refusal to give satisfa£rion, as in the instance of poft - poning ad referendum, had a retrospective view, and in fast confirmed and ratified every thing which constituted a real treaty, and upon that account solely amounted to an aggref - iion, upon which the manifefto was founded.

This brought him back to what he meant particular ! y in this stage of the debate to make a few observations upon, that was the supposed intimate knowledgefof the noble Lord respe < 5iing the frame and constitution of the interior of the Dutch government; With this he acknowledged himself to be little acquainted. It might or might not be just as the noble Lord - had described. The difficulties might be numerous; the em - barraftfnents greatthe instances quoted by the noble Lord, which his Lordship had stated t6 have happened at former periods, might have been faithfully and correctly stated, with all the ^ peculiar circumstances which accompanied them. But although he was ignorant of the particular fa < fts referred to, and was ready to take the whole upon trust, he could by no; means subscribe to theconclufion drawn by the noble Lord; for without enteringintoa critical enquiry about the respective rights, immunities, original institutions, and local privileges of this or that particular province, city, or distrkft; or tracing out the relation they bore to each other respectively, or to the governing aggregate power, he was fully authorised to maintain, on the general law of nations, that every state was bound to answer for the act or acts of its subjects, or those who acknowledged its sovereign or luprecne dominion. It was ahfurd to suppose, that a single exception could exiil against this general rule; if there could one, ' another might be pleaded, and so on, ad infinitum. It would, ini that case, be impossible to draw a line. And h < ? wiftied that noble Lords would feriously consider the doctrine; and fee what mischiefs it might, nay must lead to, and ' what art incongruity and repugnancy of conduct it would involve.. In the

pre -

A - 178. 1. ' DEBATES.

present instance, for example fake, he begged their Lordships to look forward to the conferences which might flow from a conduct so absurd and prepofterous nothing lefs than that one, two, or more of the provinces might legally or constitutionally be at liberty to openly or secretly, directly or indirectly, support our rebel subjects in arms against us;. while the other part of the republic, as allies, were giving us actual assistance for the purpose of reclaiming and coca - pell ing them to return to their former state of obedience ;

He was indeed ashamed to trouble their Lordships in refuting a species of apology, or justiftcation, which carried, by inference at leaft, if not expressly, so glaring an abfurdi - ty on the very face of it; because he might have well saved the House and himself the trouble of offering a Angle fyl - lable upon the subject, by standing on this indifputable, self - evident proposition, as supported by the law of nations, and ' the unerring rules of justice and common sense : —“ That every state is responftble for the acts of their respective fub - jedls; —or, that every Bate is so far responftble for the acts of their subjects, as to disavow the subject matter of complaint, and promife that fort or quantum of redrefs which the constitution, or nature of the interior or municipal frame of their government enables or impowers them to give. ” Apply this princiole or position to the case under consideration, and he believed there was not a noble Lord that heard him who would pot instantly acknowledge, that the refusal to disavow the adb, by poftponing the consideration of thecom - plaint ad referendum, though it might not be. in the power of the States General to punish the offenders, answered exactly that species of implied approbation, which amounted to an aggression fully authorising the manifefto on the table.

I Noble Lords, in the course of their arguments; drew Ami - I litudes from the nature of our own constitution; they main - j tained, that in many in fiances redrefs could not be had from I individuals, nor satisfaction obtained but by due course of law. He believed no man difputedit; but he wished that noble Lords would fee how far this argument met the motives which induced the issuing the manifefto, or bore upon the case therein made out. He was not to be told, that in this country persons not offending against any fubflftinglaw could not have a measure of punishment set out, where the municipal laws were Alent ;, but he was yet to learn, or hear a possible case stated, where an individual, town, country, distrhft, pr part of thisfifland, having committed an a < 9t that might lead to a just cause of rupture with an independent or foye - 1 reign

PARLIAMENTARY Aw 781,

reign. Rate, in which the - parties offending were not in fojtne fihape or other accountable to, and punishable by the municipal law, and the nation bound to make reparation as. being responfible for the acts of its subjects. If that was a clear proposition, binding upon us, it mart clearly bind every other power; and he wished to be clearly underfiood when laying down the foregoing general doctrine, that he meant to apply it to every particular, as well as more general case that could poflibly arise : and he would pulh this proposition its full length, and follow it with this specific declaration, % that if any subjedf, or greater number, under the dominion or government of this country, should, by an acte of any kind whatever, be the cause of creating a difference or disagreev ment, or what might, without satisfaction given by ' the necessary measures or remedies which the law of nations pre - scribes : ftfch an act would be punishable, though no specific municipal law existed for that purpose, upon another general law, no lefs binding and operative, namely, the law of nations, ” - Were it otherwise, the power of the Rate would be grossly defective, because if would suppose this, that a right destrudlive and ruinous to the well being of the Rate refilled in individuals; a supposition too nonfenfical in itfelf, and too pregnant with absurdity, to gain a moment’s credit. “ Every man, in his opinion, therefore, who propagated any thing which had, or might be productive of a rupture with foreign powers, was punishable, not perhaps by the municipal laws of that Rate, but by the law of nations,. by which every individual, as well as the Rate itfelf, is indif - putably bound; and therefore in every ihflance in which the doctrine applied, the law of nations was consequently interwoven into, and formed part of the municipal law of the country. ”

The noble Lord, to whom he had so often alluded, contended, that by the act of our miniRer at the Hague, arid the renunciation of the treaties of 1674, the casus fcedcrls, from the inflant that paper was delivered, ceased to exiR ' He con - sessed, that this was the fiirR time he ever heard of that cir - cumftance. He - should, however take themoble Lord’s word for it, being satisfied, that his Lordship would not Have mentioned it, - if he had not good ground for fb doing. But, be that as it; may, the exiRenceof the fadb was totally immate rial for the argument, in the manner his Lordship ' - hadtaken it up. It. might take off; from the treachery and turpitude ' oF the a ^ t, but that was. all, and ' very little even in tfiatdighi} fgfif heunderRood the noble Lord right, the - papier contain -

A. iiSj.. D E B A - f E S.

( ng the supposed renunciation or difTolution of the existin ^ treaties between Great Britain and Holland, was delivered in 1779; whereas the treaty signed by Van Berkel and the rebel delegate was executed in 1778, so that the renunciation was pofterior. to the; treaty.

The matter of justiiication being out of the question, as ’ be was just going to obfprve, the date of the two fafts took away even the colour of extenuation; for it amounted to :. this clearly, that in the midft df the most confidential seem - ing amf ? y, and while three several treaties of alliance, and the most intimate connexion still remained in full force, our. pretended friends, but real enemies had, under such sacred sanction. s, secretly entered into a treaty with our rebel subjects, for a. commercial intercourse, which treaty had for its '. eventual object, the reparation or dismemberment of a confi - d. erable part of the empire, and the defection and independence of several millions of its subjects.

He had dwelt upon this circumstance. so long only to shew ^ that no part of the turpitude of the republic of Holland was, ' or could be leffened, or done away, by any act of ours, fub - sequent to the date of the treaty; not that he thought it was necessary at all to justify the measure, having already considered it as a general proportion, e ( that apower in amity with us, entering into a treaty with our rebel subjects, - contrary to the established law of nations, was in itfelf nnsupported by any other circumstance, fully fufhcierit to justify the measure of bluing letters of marque _ and re - prifal against the power who should act. in that mat ! - ner. ”

His Lordship having very fully and ably debated the jufr tice of the measure, then proceeded to deliver his fentimentS on its expediency. —On this point his LordfKip was not so ' diffuse.

He readily assented to, the general impression which had been endeavoured to be made on the House by several noble Lords near him, that war at all times should be the effect of neceffity, but more particularly lb at the present period, when we had so great and formidable a combination leagued against us. And if the measure, the propriety of which was so strongly called into question this day, was not a measure of necefftty, those who undertook to advise it would indeed be much to blame. For his part he thought it came within that description; and though he wished, as much; as any noble Lord - who heard him, to avoid a measure at all

Vox,. Irf F events

PARLIAMENTARY. A. 1781.

events hazardous, and perhaps dangerous, and attended with, singular difficulty and embarrassment, yet after fully considering the advantages and disadvantages which might ormuft result from it, he made a choice on that very ground, ' the only one on which noble Lords declared they thought the present measure defenlible.

It was needlefs t6 recur to any further arguments upon the justice of the measure; he prefumed that had already been amply difculFed; the point now to be considered was, whether we could, with either honour or public security, have a£ted other wife than we had done ? He was of opinion we could not; because the possible evils which might arise from the step we had taken would be felt in their fulleft ex - tent, and in his opinion more fatally, if Holland had been I permitted to effect that under cover of ' secrecy, and as it were by Health, which she is now called upon to maintain at her rifque and peril : it might, besides, poffibly have this good effe&, the compelling that justice by force of arms, which the most unexampled forbearance and every other effort in our power, by the means of amicable perfuafion and remonllrance, had failed to accomplish.

But suppofing that the fame spirit and disposition which dilated the causes of complaint on our parr, should ( till continue to direct the councils of the republic; suppofing that they should uphold by force, what had originated - in a breach of faith, and of national perfu. lv, a recourse to the common occurrences and situations in familiar life, applied to states and kingdoms, would, he believed, justify him in the conclusion, that an open enemy was at all times preferable to a concealed one. if therefore a pre - diiposition against us ' should itiil continue to manifeft itfelf, such as had made the present step necessary, he was perfuaded that the most efficacious means of bringing the States General to a proper and just way of thinking, would be to convince them, that their conduct was not to escape unpunishecl in either event, whether they had acted haftily or deiignedly. For his part, he was of opinion, ! that the best mode of bringing Holland to a real explana *; tion, all other efforts for that purpose, having repeatedly failed, was to aft precifeiy as we had done. Holland had now her option; file had it in her power to disclaim those apparent intentions ' which denoted every appearance of hoftility, 01 she would be compelled to throw off the mafque. Upor this ground, if upon no other, he thought the expedient ]

S A. 781. .. ' y D E B A T X S.

i

| of - the measure might be fairly defended upon every princi - I pie of found policy.

I Many other arguments had been urged against : the expe - diency of the measure, " and many reasons fisted, in order to ipro ^ eits impracticability. What, will you add, said noble Lords, Holland to France, Spain, and America. ? Can you; expect to defend yourself, much. lefs make fucccfsful \yar against them all ? This was not, in his conception, a mere matter of choice, nor the question, when thus stated, jfairly put. It was not an option left to this country, [ whether she would not chuse to have Holland added to [ the confederacy already formed in Europe and America j - rfar from it. He who could gravely propole such an alternative, or having it proposed to him, and could hefi - i tate a moment to make a choice, must be worfe than inca - 1 pable—he must be mad. Were that the case, it would in - i deed furnifK the moil cogent proofs of every degree of igno - l ranee and incapacity, which had by noble Lords been im - puted to ministers; but the question so framed was not truly stated; the question was limply this : Holland is determined tp be your enemy at all events; the only choice therefore left to Great Britain, is, whether she would prefer having Holland an open or a secret foe.

Other grounds of impracticability had been warmly prefled in argument, as naturally arising from the treaty entered into by the neutral powers, for the protection of their commerce,. to which treaty the States General, noble Lords have affirmed, is a contracting party, and of course under its protection. Predictions of a very extraordinary tendency had been plentifully dealt out upon that lupposition; such as that Ruffia, and the other contracting powers, would be naturally led into the \var; and several other predictions, or apprehensions of a similar nature. He did not pretend to ., enter minutely into, those circumstances, nor think it necessary to descend into the probability, or improbability of what Ruffia might or might not do; but if he understood the noble Lord, whoipoke to this point, he believed it was sufficient to observe, that the terms of the armed neutrality had nothing at all to do with the present measure. The armed neutrality, he understood, though he did not pretend to speak from his own knowledge, related ^ only to the protection of a free navigation. It neither respected any transaCtion in which the contracting parties might be concerned, as powers in a state of common amity, and of course, as he had frequently observed in the course of his

P 2 offer -

IOB

Lord Camden,

PARLIAMENTARY Ai ' tytU

observations, not relative to a free navigation, much lefs to ^ the breach of previous fubdfting treaties with. othbr powers;; On the contrary, he understood, that all subsisting treaties, previous to the treaty of neutrality, were Cxpressly excepted ^ so that upon the whole, - - as wp had no choice relative to Hoi -. Jandj ' but that of having her as a secret indead of an - opei ^ enemy, and as the grounds of oiir difference with that re - public, whether in ' respeCb of the treaty with our rebellious subjects, or the breach of the treaties already subsisting be - tween"Her and Great Britain ^ were totally tiriconneCted, arid didiriCt from the treaty entered into by the neutral powers, ' for the protection, of their commerce, and for the prefer tion of a free navigation; he truded that he had satisfaCtor rily proyed to their Lordships that whether the practicability of the war was certain, itsjudice and expediency ’ had been. clearly arid most unquedioriably made out.

His Lbfdship concluded with observing, that as the ad -. dress moved by the noble, Viscount neither did nor was rneaint to preclude a further and fuller di. fcuflion, nor to ' bind a ( ingle Lord who might support it with his vote that day, he should of cpurfe be against the subsetjuent motion moved - by the noble Duke.

Lord Camden said, he had long ( ince resolved never more to trouble their Lordships on any part of the subjecfc which would of course neceffarily mix apd force itfelf into the dif -. cuflion of the quedion now before the House; he meant the American war, ' including its various circumstances and ner cessary relatives. He was long ( ince convinced it vya$ to 09 manner of purpose for him to take up any matter iiy that House upon adverse ground. He had tepeated experience how pugatory it would be, as it had always hitherto proved, to come there a. s an opponent to the measures decided, upon by ministers. supported as they had uniformly bpen by the mod : decided majorities ip that House. There was, besides, the lefs temptation, arid the fewer hope ' s upon this occasion, as the subjecf of the present debate had been fq amply dif - cuffed, upon a tpotion made lad year, by his noble friend near him [ Shelburne ]. Before he proceeded ? therefore, to submit his poor opinion to their Lordships, he would beg Jeave to prerpife, that whatever he might offer was by way of advice to those whom his Majesty had entrusted with the condu&i. ng the affairs of government, in hopes that it might make a suitable impression; and to express his wish, that as they were fufijciently drong and powerful to carry any mea -

4

A, iyBiiv, 13 E. B ’ A T ' E. S /.

Jure, that they would adopt that which; seemed most fiiitedi; to the dignity and honour of the nation, and to die : advance pent and preservation of its interests.

• It was for this reason, and ' this only, he rofe. fife rofe from a - "call of duty, for the lad : time,; and whatever might be the event of this final effort tofave his country, at leafti to mitigate her distrefles - and misfortunes, he fhouldretife : from his fruitless attendance in that House with this consola - tion, that he had discharged his duty. to the belt of his poor abilities,; fb long as it promifed to be produ£tLve of the finall -. eft or most remote good; and; : that®. be declined giving theic Lordships or himself any further trouble, when hope was at an end, and when even zeal;.. had no. object which could call it into a&ivjty. Looking ‘back on former transactions, be had great reason to lament that he did not form the refo - ! lution earlier, or that some circumstance had not arose which plight have been. the means. of.. preventing him from en~

I gaging in so ineffectual a struggle. Either event would have I freed him, as well as many > other noble Lords, from much jchagrir ), and a series of the most mortifying dilappointf jments, ftilbthe : more highly aggravated, because they in jyolved in them1 consequences. which seemed to him to; teod, if npt ' direffly and inevitably lead, to the : ruin of his jjcountry. •

|. The noble and learned Lord who spoke - last, with his usual I ability and dexterity in debate, - had, as he said, brought the Iquestion within a narrow compass. He had indeed with - r ih a very narrow compass ! He had reduced it to a mere question of order, ' out of which he had endeavoured jjto entirely exclude the formal, as well as substantial me - Irits of the subject matter of debate. The learned Lord Isaid, it is nothing to the present question, whether the mea - Ifure was pra&icable, whether : it was unjuft, or whether it Imight ' prove ruinous to the nation; but it was merely a Ipoint relative tp the regularity of their Lordships ’ proceed - lings, whether the add refs mpved by the noble Lord in the Igreen ribbon ftiQUld be entertained, or a negative be put iiipon that moved by the noble Duke ? This ', he confessed, Iwas a curious method of coming tp a decision upon any Iquestion, and upon every question; the regularity of their iLordships ’ proceedings were to be preserved at; all events, ithough the salvation of the nation might eventually depend fupon their being dispensed with in the particular instance. '

I But if the doCtrine itfelf was not to be impeached, how did the learned Lord prove its orthodoxy ? By the most ex - I traordinary

IIP

PARLIAMENTARY A. 11781.

traordinary and novel kind of proof imaginable ^ where proof; is deemed necessary. The noble Lord fays, upon his own authority, that there is not a single precedent existing, where a royal meffage, or other communication from the throne, has not had the preference, or where. any other matter has been. introduced into, or mixed with the matter so communicated, : He begged leave to observe, that this was no more than a mere unauthenticated assertion of a noble Lord in his place : that however confidently the assertion might be urged, and with however loud a voice and emphasis, it, could pass,. or be received, for no more than it imported; a belief, opinion, or diBum ^ not binding nor capable of bringing home con - ! vi£tion to any one noble Lord, at either fide of the House, who heard it. He, for instance, upon equal credit, and equal authority, was intitled to lay, that he was ready to aifert, or believed, which was really the case, that there were many, very many precedents, in the records of Parliament, where other matters were proceeded upon previous to the taking royal communications and meflages into consideration. Here then his and the learned Lord’s contrary creeds and af « fertions Hood in exact equilibrio; and it was consequently incumbent upon the learned Lord, who made thefiril ailertion, either to prove it from parliamentary documents, their Lordships Journals on the table, or to confess, that his assertion should be considered merely in the light it deserved; an assertion unsupported by evidence of any kind whatever, and solely retting upon that kind of authority, Jf his Lord - ship should therefore refuse that species of proof which fa$s when denied or controverted neceffarily require, this would, he trusted, amount to a prima facie refutation of the fact as ttated, and of every. argument raised and deduction drawn from its suppoled existence. it was indeed. the only colour of argument which the noble Lord seemed willing to trust to; and which, if it should fail him, opened the field of debate and free discussion, and let in the Hpufe to enter into a fulij invettigation of the subject, upon the grounds, of justice and ! expediency, not contrary, but agreeably to the apcient eftaJ blished ufages and customs of Parliament, I

The learned and noble Lord had it was true followed i with another argument, pretty nearly of a similar complexioij and import; for, conscious that the former could not ttaql the teft, his Lordship had recourse to one precifely of the fan ) ! size. Said the noble Lord, “ the measure fan < Stioned by tb King’s name is to be considered as the measure ©f piiniflers

ai ) l

Ill

A 1781. DEBATES.

!. •

and while it would be extremely indecent, as coming under hat fan£tion, to pollpone its consideration, or controvert its propriety, ministers are nevertheless responlible to the Parliament and public; and the motion made by the noble Duke, hr any other motion of a similar tendency, may, as soon as the answer moved is agreed to, or at any future period, be taken up de novo, their Lordships not being bound by the jpresent proposed vote, no more than if it had never passed fthat House. ” This was, indeed, going a great length; and was such a mode of reasoning as the learned Lord, with all •thofe powers of an advocate, which he was known to poflefs in so eminent a degree, would not, he was perluaded, be fable to maintain.

■ Here there were two objects for their Lordships ’ confederation. One was the prerogative of the Sovereign to make iwar, which no man disputed; the other, the exercise of that Iprerogative, which the learned Lord had acknowledged was prefumed to be exercised by advice. In what ihape then did the question come before the House, but that the fame perilous who advised the measure, likewise advised the meflage ;

| and that their Lordships were called upon to give their ap - l probation, not to what his Majesty had personally directed to I be carried into execution, but what he had by the servants of I the crown been advised to do. The noble Lord was at liberty to take his option - —either to accept of a personal compliment to the Sovereign, for having ailed as he had done, in conformity to the constitutional advice of his servants; or considering the measure merely as a ministerial one, open to that general species of discussion to which every measure submitted to them by Parliament is always subjeit.

! He hegged their Lordships, however, to look a little further, and turn their attention from mere words to things. His Majesty’s ministers advise a declaration of war, or, which is in substance the fame thing, a manifefto, accompanied with orders for ifliung letters of marque and reprifals. They further advise his Majesty to communicate this to his Parliament; but cm bono f for their Lordships are not to delibe -

Irate; they are not to seek any. further information, or mix what the learned Lord is pleased to call extraneous matter. — Nothing like it : —according to the language of the noble Lord, they are implicitly, without hefitation, doubt, or enquiry, to echo back the very words of the meffage, in aim oft totidem verbis, and containing the most full and unreferved approbation of the measure thus communicated in all its parts. The learned Lord ’ s. abilities were unquestionabie; his powers

PAR L I A M E N T A R; Y A. 1781,

of fiebate universally. acknowledged; but. there Were many things to which he was not equal;. he could not reconcile impoffibilities; he could not put a face upon what was absurd in itfelf, or contradictory, and make it wear the appearance of reason, argument, and truth. It was not in the power of the topft willing and zealous advocate, nor the greatest orator, to - do it. To address their Lordships upon a measure pre viously - determined upon, and which was said it was indecent tpdifcufs, was a farce—it. was monftrous—and contained in it every appearance of mockery and premeditated infult.

; Yet if the attempt itfelf was provoking, and had still been further aggravated by the reasons urged in its support, he would, for an instant, after he had stripped the question of the cloud of words and phrafes in which it had been so inge - niously wrapt up, point to the consequences.

The matter, when stripped of its artificial cloathing, was this : —The conduct of the States General had been such, as, in the opinion of ministers, to make it necessary to issue letters of marque and reprifals; the evidence on which ministers. had thought; proper to prove this pretended neceffity was on the table. The quefiion then was ^ this; shall those who do not, as well as those who do, think the evidence sufficiently ' cogent. to justify the measure, agree to it ? and shall the dif - Tentients in opinion wave all opposition ? G ! to be sure, fays - the noble Lord; “ You are bound to do it; you are bound by precedent, in ^ the first : instance; moreover the respect which. you owe to your Sovereign requires it. The measure may be a very mifchievous or unwife one; but that is nothing at all; ' you cannot according to the order of your Lordships proceedings difient; and if you could, itfelf, it would be indecent and difrefpeClful, —but I can tell you what you maj do; after the address shall be agreed to, you may then controvert the justice and expediency of what you had befori only approved of for form fake. ”

He would not say, that those were the noble and leama. Lord’s precife words; but he appealed to every noble Lori who heard him, if it was not their unequi vocal import. Ncn he begged leave to say, that no argument or reasoning it m possible for the mind of man to conceive could be more fallal cious or unfounded; for how would the case stand ? ThJ war had been denounced or made against the republic of Hoi land during the recefs of Parliament; that Parliament, upon being made acquainted with it, approved of the measure, ail consequently bound themselves and the"nation to all the col sequences of a fate of hoftility with a powerfulnatidn : j > |

A. 1731 - DEBATES - ii$

| for all this, the noble arid learned Lord had a Jatvo in either f evejit, be the measure right or wrong; for in the first place,

[ the order of their Lordships ’ proceedings obliged them to echo back the measure in the highest terms of approbation; and if ! the nation should, in the event be ruined or undone the I people would liave the satisfaction of calling upon iftinifters *

I whom his Lordship had described as ultimately responlible i for the consequerices '

| After endeavouring to shew the extreme absurdity and [ fallacy of the learned Lord’s arguments and holding them up in a great variety of - lights to evince their fbphiftry as I well as express contradiction, his Lordship said, flnce he was up he would consider the ' main question shortly in some of its principal rrelations »

He would not pretend to say, taking all the treaties fub - ! lifting between this country, how far the casus foederis did ' or did not actually exist. It was certain from the manner they were drawn up, as well as the several occasions which gave them birth, that they were extremely complicated, and difficult to be at the fame time specifically and erquitably interpreted; not but he thought Great - Britain arid Holland, if they came with a willing mind and in a good temper to qualify their respective claims, the several seeming contradictions which pervaded the different parts of those treaties might, be reconciled, and a concordance effected between the whole so as to guard the rights, claims, and reasonatele and equitable expectations of both. Be that as it may, the present question, so far as the justice of the measure was concerned mull Hand or fall by those treaties, such as they were *

By the treaty of 1674 it was expressly stipulated, ' that Great Britain and Holland should be at liberty to carry all kinds of goods and merchandizes, either of their own growth or produce, or belonging to any other power, without let, hindrance, or molestation, under any pretence whatsoever except the particular articles therein specified, under the de - scriptkm of military stores, which were very different from what was at present considered as military stores or contraband, and that even to an enemy aCtually at war. This however severe it might appear, or harlh it might found, beyond a possibility of redrefs, upon the terms of the treaty, was the balls of all the Succeeding treaties; and if broken or violated, unless in such instances as had been subsequently provided for, moll clearly bound Great Britain, or ' if the - latter, urged by aneceffity not in ’ being, forefeeri or provided Vol. I, Q ^ for *

214 '

PAR LI AMEN TAR Y A. i ? tu

for, at the time of making the treaty, refufed40. abide by it, such a conduct in our part, would ( instantly dissolve the obligation on which the casus foederis was supposed to exist, nay, only upon which it could at all exist. /

When their Lordships therefore came to decide upon the ' present measure,.. as a meafu - re of fta. te, itwias a duty incum -, bent upon them to have, every - paper necjefTary to a full information on the Tubje&, as it really flood. In ' the first place, the treaties themselves, ' but. more particularly the Yeveral transactions from the first begmBipgs 0; f thiis business, ^ such as the complaints of the Dutch, on account of our seizing their ( ships and vessels, the confiscation of the goods and merchandises belonging, or supposed to belong to the powers at war with us, aboard those ships; inffiort, every matter respect - 1 ing the - opinions entertained in Holland .; Qn4he contrary, ! their Lordships had not a tittle of iriformation, but a mere bead - roll of our complaints, as made, from time to - time, by pur minister at the Hague. In his opinion, their Lordships, before they came to a solemn determination upon so important a question, which might in its consequenees involve this country into dpdlefs mifery and ruin, ought to trace the dif - agreements between the courts. of London and the Hague to their origin - 9 in order to know where the fault began; if on our part, that, speedv satisfaction might be given; if not, that be the event what it would, we might endeavour to reconcile ourselves to that republic, upon the most perfuafiye. of all - argument ' s, that of unavoidable neceflity.. “

Most clearly, in his opinion, if the treaty. of 1674 was not binding, upon Great Britain, none of the rest could be binding on Holland; and when the noble Viscount, who moved the address in answer to his Majesty’s meffage, - re - counted the different refufals of the States General to comply; with the several requifttions made by the British court, for the performance of subsisting treaties, he began at the wrong end. ‘His Lordship should, in order to give the leaft degree of Weight to his arguments, have proved, that we had inviolably adhered to the terms of that treaty in all its parts, so. far as it depended upon us, or if any deviation had happened, topromife and undertake that the cause Of complaint should be immediately and effectually removed.

I He had no other information on the subjedf, for his own part, "but that species recommended by the noble Lord in the green ribbon, namely, the foreign Gazettes. ' This authority was either no authority, or it was such as ought to be. ‘ -; relied

17IS1. 4 D E B ATE S. '

relied oni ., He was to prefume the latter; other wife the noble Viscount would not, Ke supposed, have recommended such information as might be found ' in the Dutch and other foreign Gazettes to direct their Lordships ’ determination.. Being ready to take this ihfprmation to be true, after it came so highly fanfHoned ' to hiin, he mull observe, that the Gazettes were very full ' and explicit on the subject. They were fluffed with reiterated complaints, both from the States General and people of Holland, and contained, catalogues of the repeated infults received by their flag,. as \yell as the innumerable injuries on the property and persons of the subjects of the republic. If he understood right, those complaints were as frequent before the requisition made by the British court, for the fuc - cours stipulated to be fuvnished by the treaties of 1678 and 1716, in case either power should be attacked as at any time since. These were points which, in his apprehension, called for the most full and serious dilcuflion, being of a nature so intimately conne£led with the measure then under their Lovd - ships ’ consideration, that it was impossible with any propriety to proceed a Angle step further in the bullnefs, consonant to the invariable principles of honour and justice, without being previously informed of every mater ial circumstance respecting the conduff : of Holland on ope hand, and of our ministers oil the other.

Many arguments, and some seemingly specious ones, had been used respecting the treaty on the table ' entered into by the perifionary,. Van Berkei, and Mr. Lee, the Congrefs delegate. —It was ' at onetime called a perfeft and complete treaty, binding upon the parties; it was again represented as a treaty, founded on a poflible contingency Wreafter to happen, before the condition could operate; and yet, however repugnant the latter comment might be to the - former, the contingency was supposed, though ever so absurdly, to express or imply a politive, unconditional undertaking. He should be feurry to wafte his own, or their Lordships time, in endeavouring to reconcile or expose, the manifeft absurdity iefulting ' from such a stile of conclusion. The treaty was intended either to take effect immediately, or it was con tingent; if contingent, it was prepofterous to describe it as an agreement immediately binding; if immediately operative, it could not be contingent, but must have instantly Iprung into being, ' and still continue in pxistence; yet nothing had been, urged, either in the shape of fa& or argument, tending tp shew, that any one flep had; been taken by. the governing

CL 3 or

P A R~L LAMENT ARY, A. 1781,

or any subordinate power in Holland, which betrayed either directly or indirectly any intention in the States General of an hoftile nature; that they knew any thing of the intrigues of Van Berkel, much lefs had determined ‘ to ratify and con - ' firm, as an aft of the Sovereign, what had probably been the mere unauthorized aft of Van Berkel himself, supportedby iome of the magistrates of the city of Amsterdam, who were well known to be in the French interest.

But suppofing, so far as the treaty went, that it was a eom - pleat one, before any conclusion was drawn, he thought it behoved those who were perfuaded of its completion, to point out how far it did operate, and thp persons whom it was supposed to bind, or could bipd. Did it bind the date, or re public ? He believed no person would venture to affirm it did, 3Did it even bind the province of Holland ? That yet remained to be proved. Who then did it bind ? For aught he could learn, from any thing that appeared to the contrary, it neither did or could bind any other persons, but merely the contraftrng _ parties whose names were signed to the instru ment.

While he was ready to condemn ministers for their general conduct, he was not ignorant, that to fleer clear of difficulties, in the present critical, date of this country, required much dexterity and address. The treaty of 1674 was productive of much embarraflrpent; and though he perfectly agreed with his noble friend near him [ Shelburne ] that the late Earl of Chatham acted with great caution, fie would add, however that to his certain knowledge, he acted, considering the em - barrafTments arising from the treaty of 1674, with peculiar address. Like a wife and spirited minider, convinced of the j necefTity of preventing our enemies from being supplied with ! the means of prolonging the war, he perhaps fqtnetimes de viated from the drift letter of that treaty, from motives of found policy, distated by the particular exigency of the times, He remembered, that his Lordship had frequently confqlted him on the occasion, having then the honour of being one of the law officers of the crown : [ Attorney General ] and he jrecollected, that the neceffity of such a conduct was dated with candour and openrieis; that every possible care was taken to give the complainants satisfaction; that fair words were returned when nothing more could with propriety be given; that a kind of compromise was frequently prefled, and that the result was rather a temporary suspension of all the treaties, tji ^ n any thing like a demand of yigid performance of them

- PQ

A. 1781 DEBATES.

on either fide. This was the mode by which that great statesman conduced the affairs of this country, to the great and which he proposed tohimself, that of humbling the power of France, and breaking and dissolving the compact between the several branches oLthe - House of Bourbon. In the very zenith of his power, in the very flush of vi&ory, he had many and strong pretences, if - not real provocations, for employing the then irrefiftible force of this country against the property I and possessions of the Seven United Provinces. But he Was too magnanimous, too wife—he judieiously qualified the claims of this country, as well as set limits to the unreasonabte demands of that republic. He a£ted with moderation, refb - iution, finmnefs, and justice. He had not only Holland to manage, but the northern kingdoms, who were at the time, independent of their extreme jealously of the growing naval power of Great Britain, rather inimically, or at leaft unfriendly inclined towards us particularly Ruffia and Sweden; yet, among such a variety of difficulties, so many adverse views, and contending interests, so many real causes given, and more pretended; such were the great abilities of that Unrivalled statesman, that he ^ voided a rupture; and though Holland might in some instances. think herfelf not perfectly well treated, yet, upon the whole, she found, that no hardship, or colour of hardship, was imposed upon her, but what merely arose from political neceffity. On the contrary, what was the con - du£t of the present ministers ? Before the commencement of hoflilities with France, or Spain, they ordered our ambaffa - dor at the Hague to present a most infolent memorial, containing threats of a most unprecedented nature, when ad - dressed to an independent state of any description; but when addressed to an ally, to the last degree provoking, arrogant, and indecent, It was to this memorial, more than to any other circumstance whatever, that he attributed ail the subse - quent conduct of the republic. The noble Lord in the green ribbon represented the people of Holland as divided by parties, and distra£ted in their public councils. He represented them as governed or milled by a Gallo - American faction. The noble Viscount might be well founded in his assertion; but if there was a Gallo - American faction, which, unhappily for Holland and Great Britain, guided the councils af the republic, contrary to the mutual benefit, advantage, and interest of both, which in his opinion could not be fepa - ated without manifeft injury to each, he ' foould aik the loble Viscount, or the noble and learned Lord, or any other

P A R LI AM ' Ell '

l Y, li ^ ' u

of his Majesty’s ministers present, - who "or whatsit was that created this, Gallo - American fadiidh; ? ~most clearly ', /them - ' ' selves. Their arrogance and infolence it was that futnished food for difeontent, and furnished arguments to the secret; and open friends of France, in the - republic, to inflame the minds of their fellowrsubjects against the government and people of Great Britain, : and to aggravate any part of our conduct, so as to perfwade ' the Hollanders, that the infults and affronts daily put upon them tended to establish an universal dominion on the ocean, and to lead to feftri&iohs upon commerce, suited to the interests and well knbwh ' ambition of the English nation, who could bear no rival m tradej and who would, •fhould ( he prevail in her present contest with America, de - - rive such. an accumulation of naval force, as to enable her to give law to the whole world on that element.

The yery arguments so strongly infilled upon by the noble Lords who supported the address -, allowing them to have been relative, justified more and more the conclusions he had been drawing, and clearly demonstrated, that if there was any powerful faction, or Gallo - American faction in Holland, Sufficiently strong to promote the interests and views of France and America, in preference - to those of Great Britain, it was the British Miniftry alone who were the cause of it.

For his own part, though he was strongly induced to be. lieve, that France and America had many, very powerful and zealous friends in Holland, he could not be perfuaded, that their influence extended the length the noble Lord in the green ribbon endeavoured to induce their Lordships to believe it did, The Dutch were a wife and politic people; commerce, and the advantages derivable from, it, were the uniform objects of their political pursuits. Their safety and in dependence naturally led them to look towards Great Britain as their onlj best friend and protedor, against the encroachments, or othei more formidable views or attempts which might be made up ! on them, by the great powers on the Continent, who possefl led territories immediately in their neighbourhood. TheJ had another motive, and a most well - founded one, for trustin ^ to the friendship, assistance, and alliance of Great Britain, ii preference to any other, which was ^ founded in the nuerrin ! and immutable principles of found policy, and ' national wii dom; and it was this, that Great Britain might be fafeiy de pended upon; because, besides the ties : of treaty and alliance she would be led to assist Holland on her own particular ac countbec. ause, in case Holland should fall, such an evep would : sooner or later lead to her own destrueStion. He there

foi

A. 1781. ', & H B A T E S. '; ii£

fore heartily coincided in the Lideas of his noble, friend,. who spoke lately, that the, interests of Holland ., and Great Britain - were the - fame; the advantages to, he,. derived, from any ahlft - ance which might be given to either mutualand their views - exactly correspondent,.. the security of their independence ^ and the extension of\theiy coriirnetee/.. - : .;,

| Th6fe confidefations, J (. of .;. Which that. republic, renowned for its wifdom, could not be ignorant ) furpished him with additional, reasons tcf suppose, - that the governing power of Hoi - ’ land never. meant toadopt any measures sufficient to justify the mgnjfefto. There were, in every ft ate, men of a particular, frame, of mind; enthusiasts, he would suppose, that, would - be glad; that. the hleffings or advantages derived from their own form. of government ’ ihoulcl be, extended to other - nations,. and at. length become universally prevalent; of this idefcripfion he made nodpub. tbut - there might be some in Holland. Many might he. seduced, by the prolpedt of gain, and a more extensive commerce;. tO; w ’ ifh well to the independent.

States of America r ancLothers again might have conceived" a ’ prediledjidn foi Franee - but allowing all this to be true, he. was ready, to maintain ’ and prove, - that if it. had not been. ' for. tfo precipitate ^ - violent,;. and pafftonate conduct of our. miriP fters,. in rest raining, or ’ rather totally interrupting and - fuf - pehding, the Dutch commerce, before ever we could, by the assistance of the most subtle invention, frame a pretence for ifting as. we have done, no war, under any form then existing in Europe, or between the subjects or any of the European states who poftefs dominions in America, or elsewhere aut of Europe, the fadlious in Holland, whether, republican, or Gallo - American, ' could. never have pretended, iidr vyould have. dared to jQiew. the leaft prpdiledlion. for France or.

America ! Nor had they yet arose to such a degree of strength,

: ven under tliofo unfavourable circumstances he had been de -, bribing, as so. be able to controul. and direct the councils" of hev republic, contrary to ifs. Jtru. e -. ' interests, - and against the aith. pjf, the engagements; fobfiftirig between England and Hoi - '

and,; '. 7. -. ' V. ’ :

Upon the whole, therefore, of the justice of the measure rnder their Lbrdftiips ’ consideration, as Well in point of the ’ ’ acts dated in the papers on the table; the provocations given in our part '; and the cpndudf of Holland under those relented infolts and a < ^ s of arrogance and oppression - towards ifiern, as from the reaforjs of policy, and the nature of the Sonne61iori between this; country and the Seven United Pro - Sinces, he was firmly perfuaded, that the resolution of going

too PAR LI AMEN T A R Y A. 1781.

to war, agreeably to the terms of the manifeflo, ought to be immediately, if riot refcinded, at leaft, taken into reconsideration, agreeably to the motion make by the noble Duke; and if no better grounds of hoftility should be the result of a more particular enquiry, that their Lordjships would be bound to order immediate reparation arid satisfaction to be given for the injury already sustained by Holland, and of course to defill from a prosecution of further hoftilities.

To the expediency of the war little remained to be said; our present situation was such as to render any argument un - necessary. We were already over - matched, arid Holland, thrown into the opposite scale, would, he had every reason to believe, be decisive of our fate; but was Holland to be the last enemy we would have to contend with in this already unequal contest r—He feared not; ——Ruffia, if the foreign Gazettes spoke truth, and he had a right to prefume they did, on the authority so often quoted ' in the course of the debate, the authority of the noble Viscount in the green ribbon— - Ruffia had already laid more. than Holland even pretended to claim under the right of subsisting treaties She published a new code of maritime law, which was to - bind all the powers of Erope, as well neutral as belligerent, and invited those of both descriptions to accede to it, by which it was ordained, that free bottoms made free goods.

Franee and Spain had already become parties; Holland had acceded to it, and her accession, if the foreign Gazettes were to be relied upon, was accepted of, and so, had the other northern powers. —— - If then “ free botoms” made ' free goods, ” where did we Hand, according to the tenor and pro - felled intention of this treaty ? But that, whether Holland was, or was not bound, by the treaties subsisting between Great Britain arid her; Ruffia, Sweden, and Denmark, were free t07act as interest or convenience might suggest. It was said, indeed, that this treaty excepted the previous particular engagements of the contrasting parties among each other; ! and that fublifling treaties were an exception to the general ! rule—granted. But then the balls of th ? neutral treaty was ! clearly, that et free bottoms” made; < ( free goods” in ail cases, ! where there was no other treaty existing,. contrary to that between the parties, consequently the very principle on which we were now contending for in respect of Holland, thatoi availing ourselves of our situation, as well in respect of that country, as the northern powers of Europe, was totally al an end. —He would suppoie, for argument fake, that Holland from her prior engagements with - this country, wai 4 ' - preclude

| a. 1781. jy ' - 5sab ' W

1 ^ precluded ' Frbip the benefit she might. otherwise derive from acceding to the armed ’ neutrality. vviiat would that tend to ? .;.

| The Dutch, who were the great carriers of northern Europe, would be not permitted to carry, on that species of Icommerce. —But would this prevent Ruftia,; Sweden, and I Denmark to transport the commodities and native growth, f of their own country ? —The anfyver was specific. and direct Ito this by no means. —The. commodities formerly transported by Holland from the place of growth would then be carried in bottoms belonging to pr employed by those respective "countries—but upon what terms,, or under what conditions, and fort of prbfe£lipn ? —Upon the terms that e ( free bottoms” make £ < free goods, ” and under the protection of the ! aggregate force of the whole armed, neutrality, who were bound to each other to assist in the common protection. of all commodities carried in free bottoms, according, to the engagements entered into by previous existing treaties.

This was a state of fa£ts, and a {tile of argument, which he did not expe£tto hear controverted, or replied to —If so. then, what did it amount to fairly, but this : - r - That the only advantages we derived from our situation of prevent - ' ing our enemies being supplied with naval {tores by the northern. crowns would completely be at an "end : For in that case those rights, ' real or pretended, which we had hitherto continued to ' exercise,. that of flopping and searching the lliips of neutral nations, and under some circuinftaqces seizing, and confiscating the property so seized, arid in every instance earchirig, if. carrying any commodity ^ deerined jto. come within the description. of naval and warlike ft ores ., would come to be difputedj and we should be then obliged tb. ’ meejt and contend with, riot only France, Spain, America - and Holland, but ilvewife with the united force of the rest of the powers which onstituted or had acceded to the armed neutrality.

This was such an eventual, iituation, as the greatest political zealot - would riot b. e prepared for, or recommend. to encounter. —He was perfuaded, it was, {rich as none of their Lordships, if the event appeared, to be a probable.. consequence of the present measure fwhich he much; dreaded ) would ever consent to —In the present. state of thtpgs, j and on the grounds. he had argued the point, the, probabilities tended to create ftrorig fears, fhat. lncli an event. would lie the fefult of a rupture with Holland,. and of : course. of; transferring the greatest part of the carrying trade, till the

Vot. i, K public

J22 :

PARLIAMENTARY A, 1781.

public tranquility of Europe should be re - established to Rviflia, Sweden, and Denmark, the respective places of growth.

He begged, before he. fat down, to submit the probablt consequences of the rupture with Holland in another point of view, though ultimately tending to the fame conclusion. l It Was said, ' by the noble Viscount, early, in the day, that the armed neutrality amounted to no more than a conditional, temporary compaCt, which bound none of the parties longer than they thought fit, or they found it convenient to adhere to it : —of course, that it was diffoluble at pleasure, He by no means understood the treaty in that light. — - On the contrary, it appeared from its tenor, not only to be spontaneously binding, but compulsory as to the object; for although one of the contracting parties might withdraw, and free himself from the particular conditions of support, so far as the terms would direCtly or jndireCtly affect other powers, not parties, still the remaining powers, who should continue to adhere to the neutrality, would, notwithstanding, look upon themselves called upon to allift in carrying it. into faithful execution, and at the fame time it would not be dif - puted that they would be willing and able to give it effect, - —What was the case in the present instance ? The neutral powers had acceded to the new system, or new code of maritime law, promulged or proposed to the other powers of die north of Europe in general. Every neutral power but Portugal had already acceded to it, so had France and Spain. Great Britain, of all the belligerent powers, only refufed her assent, and the reason was evident; because the regulations contained in that code were hurtful and injurious to her, and not so to the other powers at war; so that no other alternative remained,. but that either the treaty of armed neutrality must be dissolved, or Great Britain, refilling to acquiesce in the regulations, would. be involved in a war with the several Hates, which formed this extraordinary, confederacy.

Connecting therefore all those circumstances, with theii different relations and probable consequences, further strength - ened by what had been stated by his noble friend [ Lord Shelburne ] who spoke lately, that by. the renunciation made by Sir Joseph Yorke, in 1779, of all ft b ( ifting treaties between Great Britain and Holland, —the maxim that ( t free bottoms make free goods, ” while t ie former removed the exceptions, and entitled Holland to all the benefits or advantages which she might derive from the treaty, taking it in it ! jnoft extensive sense, the latter protected the property of the

1. 1781. ' £ > £ 6 A T E S.

epublic, so long as Great Britain and Holland remained in ( late of peace *

This being the true state of the, question between this iountry and the United Provinces, he could discover, without pretending to much political sagacity, the real drift and tendency of the present measure, so far as it was a question f state, respeCfcing the present or future conduCt of foreign ) owers. —Ministers were not ignorant of the truth of the arguments he had now refbrted to; —they knew that they are not openly infringe the terms of the armed neutra - Ity, nor defeat the intentions of those powers which had flready acceded to it, under the pretence of a breach of

Sweaty committed by Holland; —and why so ? because they; re conscious that no such violation of treaty had in faCt ken place—They did, nor could not forget that they were e first aggreflors, and that they seized the Dutch property rig before there could exist a breach of treaty, or a prerice for it, that was before any war broke out in Europe, fader those embarrassments, they were fortunately presented ith what they thought proper to interpret into an aggression, ) tally unconnected and independent of the provisions ani bjects contained in the new code of maritime law, and den - mined to avenge themselves upon Holland, for what they ad themselves, by their ignorance and arrogance, been the : al cause, and foie authors of —But however fraught with, rtifice and dilingenuity this device appeared, he much doubted hether it would receive so ready a sanction from the mem - srs of the armed neutrality, and of the court of Peterfburgh, hich first formed it, as it seemed to receive in that House. In the contrary, truth would prevail, and be weighed against rtifice and evasion. —Ministers began at length to - perceive le fatal consequences which were about to arise from their vn misconduCt—They. knew that Holland was just upon ie point of acceding to the armed neutrality, and that jper - ns or deputies had been sent from the Hague to Peterfburgh, ippessly forthepurpose of notifying the accession of therepub - iin due form; —nay, for ought he knew, that accession had, was to have taken ' place on the very day, perhaps, but if > t, within a day or two, of the publication or the manifefto 1 the table. —Thus by this flimfy pretext ministers flattered emfeives that they should at once cover their own blunders, id under the pretence of detecting the Dutch in having en - red into a treaty with the American Congrefs, deprive them : that security and protection which they would, but for

R z ' this

124 PA R, L I A, ME N, T. A R, Y A. 1781.

this circumstance, be clearly entitled to as a member of the armed fieutrality. —In ftiort, they ‘ would how endeavour to conceal or palliate their own guilt, to, gloss over their own impolitic, violent, irrefolute, arid hrijaftijEiable treatment of Holland, which proved the cause bf ' driving that country from her connexions with thisj, and of wqrking ' her up into a state of indifference, if not of enmity, by reducing the nation into a quarrel totally ministerial, "and which the people of Great Britain had nothing to do with, ' in point of either juf tice or expediency. ’ Butthe attempt, he prefumed, would prove, as found policy as jt ' appeared to be equally fool hardy and unprincipled; Ruffia, if previously bound, would, fee how far ’ the reasons contained in the manifeftd were founded, and would conduX herfelf ' accordingly. — - She would draw the line, when judging of ‘ the conduX : of the British miniftry, thatfeparated or distihguished ah aX of real neceffity, from a measure of mere convenience, and would impartially determine how far the treaty entered into between the pension - ary Van Berkel, and Mr. Lee, the Congrefs delegate, could be fairly prefumed, in faX or dedhXion, to bind the governing power in Holland.

He begged pardon, but he thought he. could not fit down under an : idea of having fully difehafged ^ his duty, without making an observation or two uponwhathad fallen, early in the debate from the noble Lord in the green ribbon, '

Holland had been represented by the noble Vifcbunt as in a slate totally defenceless at home, and ' extremely vulnerable, in ' the Various possessions she held iit the : eastern and weftern quarters of the globe. - —He fhoukl not pretend td eontradift his Lordship, because he was not fuffipiently informed on the subjeX but so much1 he ( wouki; ' fifque, ‘ ( thap. every ajlf vantage we derived from ' the1 Vra ' K ' preparation we. were in, I could at - best promife.. us nd more than a. short - jived, tern - 1 pdf ary success. The Dutch ' were naturally a brave people,; they had proved it in a great variety of inflances; and hiftory enabled ’ him to pronounce with confidence, that they had upon ^ mahy occasions shewed themselves ihfbriqr to none in the qualities requifite to conffitute the Teaman or foldjer. It was natural that he should be prejudiced in favour of his own country, ahd therefore unwilling; td; alldw them an equality in respeX of courage or conduX; but after that exception, not even zeal or prejudice could induce Kim to deny tfat at foa their courage and Ikill flood ' unquefiioned;. and that they were at leafb a match, if ' notTiipefidr ^ with. aii equality

z

A. i7§i.. D ' ^ E B A T E *. S.

of force, to any; other power in Europe but Great Britain, A Van Trump, a De Ruyter, &c. proved - what heroes ' Holland hadproduced. - —The people still continued the fame. in every respect; they, posseifed the fame power, and internal means and resources of defending themselves,. or annoying : their enemies. — - O/f ^ r VAN TRUMPS might arise, and struggles and combats equally - bloody, obstinate, and doubtful in the event, might be the consequence of the present measure struggles of such a nature, and claims of vi&ory fb contrary in their nature, as not to have been determined at the end of a century which of the combatants were vanqmshed or worsted, or W ’ hich had proved victorious.

He hoped it would not be improper to add a Angle word on. the nature of : the approaching war, as it had struck him : If our great. exertions were to - be directed to the defence of our. south - weftern coasts, to the defence of our. channel, and the protection of our outward and homeward - bound trade fleets, he begged to - submit to - their Lordfhi. ps,. the dangerous, at leaft precarious state of theeaftern coasts of the kingdom.. Befides. the safety. and security of our commerce to the Baltic, the North, and our coal trade, hefubmitted to their. Lordships what would be the situation of the whole of the commerce carried on by the way of the Thames. Most certainly - either the whole of that commerce, which included half the .; commerce of the whole ifland,. must be deserted, or a squadron must constantly be stationed in the Downs, for the the safety and protection of the ships passing and repaffing through the mouth of that river. If then a squadron, and a squadron of considerable force must be destined for that fer - vicev ft was clear that not. only the present measure would ad. d to our nominal enemies ^ but that it would in fact weaken our efficient defence, because it would lock up a part which. might, be mother wife. employ ed dgainjl France; and Spain both, in Europe : arid ^ f/kvhere. '

,. Xi O R D PROTEST. -

. ., Dh yovis 2$o. yanuarzi, 1781.

. It was moyed,. that the motion for an address be poftp. oned, in order that the House may take into consideration another motion “ for ah address to his Majesty, that he would be graciously. pleased to give orders, that there be forthwith laid before, this House. copies of all the treaties lately subsistingbe - tween Great Britain and the States of the Seven United Provinces, and; also of the correspondence between his Majesty ’ a ministers. and his.. late ambassador at the Hague, and - of all memorials, lequifttionSj manifeftos, answers, and other papers

which

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

which. bave;. passed between the two courts, as far as they relate < in any respect to the present rupture, or to any mifunderftanding or complaints which have existed between the two nations since the commencement of hoftilities between Great Britain : and the provinces of North America.

Which being objected to, after long debate, the question was put, whether to agree to : the laid motion It was resolved in the negative. 1

Contents 191

Proxies o J l < ^

. Non - contents 681

Proxies 16J.

DifTentient,, ■

ift. Bccaule we cannot content to involve this and other nations in all the horrors of war, but upon the clearest proofs both of justice and necelfity; and it would be peculiarly in - consistent with our public, trust,. without such evidence, to give a parliamentary fanft. i. en to a war against the ancient and : natural. allies of this nation.

It is on the justice of our cause, and on the absolute necef - fiiy of proceeding to such extremities, that we muff be answerable to - God. and our co ' nfciences for ameasure which ne - cefiarily plunges millions - of innocent people in the utmost distress, and mifery ., It is on this foundation : alone that we can with confidence pray for success, or hope for the protec - tion of Providence.

We conceive that a careful, and above all, an impartial examination of the, correspondence between his Majesty’s ministers and his; late ambassador at the Hague, and of all the memorials, complaints, requisitions,. maiiifeftos, answers, and other papers which have passed between the two courts, as far : as they relate in any respe& to the present rupture, is indif - penfible to warrant Parliament in pronouncing whether the - hoftilities which his Majesty has authorised :. his subjects to ’ commence against those of the Seven United Provinces are, or are not, founded in justice, and conlequently before they can with proprietyoffer to his Majesty any advice, orpromifehim any assistance in the present conjuncture.

The sudden attack which the ministers have advised his Majesty to begin against the property of our neighbours, failing in full confidence ' of peace and of their alliance with this nation, made without allowing the ufuai time stipulated; by treaties, even between enemies, for securing the property of unfufpe£ting individuals in case of a sudden rupture, is a

proceeding

A. 1781. D E B ATE S.

proceeding which, till explained, must appear unwarranted by the law of nations, and contrary to good faith; nor can. we, upon the hare recommendation of ministers, approve of such a conduct, or determine upon the nice construction of treaties and reciprocal obligations, without so much as hearing what our late allies and friends have on their fide to allege. r

But the influence ? of his Majesty’s ministers in Parliament has been such, as to obtain not only the regeftion of a motion which has been made for this necessary information, but also. to induce this great council of the nation, on a matter deeply affecting their ipoft important interests, to give a solemn opinion without any knowledge of the facts on which they have pronounced with f© blindfold a compliance to the will of the court.

2dly, Because, however sufficient the reason of justice ought to be, that of expediency may perhaps be more prevalent, and is not wanting on this occasion.

It has been the uniform and approved policy of our ablest jtatefmen, for near a century, to form alliances, and to unite with the powers on the continent to refill the ambitious attempts of the House of Bourbon ., The Protestant republic of Holland, from the freedom of its constirution and senti - ment, as well as from its religion, has ever been deemed a valuable support of the liberties of Europe. Twice have they been on the very verge of falling a sacrifice to Franee in this cause, and we can never believe that their old affection to Great Britain can have been alienated, much lefs that a direct rupture with them can have become necessary on our part, without grofs mismanagement in our councils. We cannot but form the most serious apprehensions at seeing the three great Protestant and free countries of Great Britain, North America and Holland, so weakening each other by war, as to become an easy prey to the ancient enemy of them all, whenever she. shall please to turn her arms against them. -

We are not infenfible of the distrefsful situation, with re -; spect to the armed neutral powers, into which we h ve been led, step by step, by the unfortunate American war; but as we are convinced that wicked and weak councils have been the foie cause of that unhappy contest, so we are perfuaded that honest and able ministers might have prevented this, amongst some of its wretched consequences.

But whilft the fame meai ' ures, which have caused our un -. exampled calamities, continue to be, pursued and cherished; Whilft a system of corruption prevails, which must exclude

botk

128

fP A R L m M E ^ N T AlR ^ Y - IA. ‘178 1

both ability ’ and integrity from ’ our > Councils; wHITft every interefoof the state is ' sacrificed ’ to its support, ’ ktid ' every attempt at reformation reje&ed. Oar condition crin change, ' but from bad to worfe.

It is - not ' for us to prefend ' to foretell events, which are in the hands; of Providence; but if causes are ' suffered to produce their natural consequences, we cannot but apprehend, from the present conduct of our affairs, every danger to this country, both foreign and domestic, to which a nation can be expo fed.

Richmond Rockingham

Portland DeyonshirIe

Fitzwilltam Pembroke

Harcourt Coventry

- Ferrers

SECOND PROTEST.

Difientient,

For the above reasons, and for that, instead of being convinced of the justice, neceffity, dr policy of a war with Holland, as We ought to be, before we give durfah£ti6n to that measure, it appears to us, as far. as the information we polfefs enables us, to be equally contrary to the ifiterefts of both countries, and to the inclinations of all whose inclinations ought; to influence the councils of either. Of such inclinations, in many respe&able members of the Dutch government, wc thought we saw, and we saw it with pleafore, a sufficient indication to encourage us to hope, that it is not yet too late to open a negotiation, by which, if cOridu&ed with the temper, and in the language of conciliation ^ we may avert the evils which the continuance of this unnatural war cannot fail to - produce.

With this view, it was recommended in the debates with the earnestness and lerioufnefs fuitabie to the occasioh, not to Idle an hour in propoling a cessation of hoftilities with Holland, for the purpose of meeting arid cultivating a friendly dispo - fition, Of reconciling commercial differences ;, arid for restoring that union of political interests which has been hitherto thought fundamentally necessary to the preservation of the Protestant religion, and of the liberties of Europe. The ihattention ol his - IVRijesty’s ministers to such a propdfitibn, in the actual cif - Cumstances of this country, their diflnclination to the objects of it, so plainly manifened by the unprecedented eonfifcaj tions intended by their proclamation bf the zbth of Decetfibes laft2 the loss of so valuable an ally, the accession of fj

conflderabl

A. 17&U. D £ IT > A ' T S. - f

considerable a force to the formidable powers, antecedently” combined agairift us, and the just grounds it affords to apprehend the acceftion of other powers to that combination, leave us no other part to take, as members of this House, after having stated our ideas of the extent of the danger, and suggested what we conceive to be the best and only remedy, than to enter our fblemn protest to exculpate ourselves from being ac - cessary to that accumulation of - evils, which we foresee, and think might be, but will not be prevented.

Wycombe, Portland

Camden,;; Rockingham

Richmond,; Fitzwilliam

Ferrers Pembroke. *

.. i ., -. ‘s. ‘January 26 *

The; House waited upon his Majesty at St. James’s with the address agreed to the preceding day, and adjourned to Monday the 29th.. :

• •. '. v January 29. ? '

His Majesty’s answer to the address of Friday was reported by the Lord Chancellor. Ordered that the Bimop of St Davids be desired to preach before their Lordships at Westminste ? Abbey, it being the 30th. of January, a parliamentary - holiday, January 30 *

This day the Lord Chancellor and the House, conftfting of two spiritual and one temporal Lord, attended divine service, and heard a sermon preached in Westminster Abbey, fuitabic to the occasion.

' Adjourned to the next day.

, .; _ _ _ January 31.

Returned thanks, to the Bishop of St. David ’ s, for the sermon preached by him the preceding day, at Westminster Abbey. .. < *,. '

,, ‘i i. ' - h February I.

7 Private buiinefs. Adjourned to the Wednesflay following *.

■. February. 7. - » •

• Met, pursuant to their iaft adjournment.

Ordered, That the Bishop of Bangor preach before their Lordships on the day of the General Fast, at Westminster Abbey. ",

Adjourned to Friday1.

The ' division did not take place tillhalf after one in the ipo ? bhtg » Qor did the, House rife till paft two.

Vol. I. February

parliamentary _ a

' February g.

... The other private business being flnished, the order of the daywas read for hearing counsel on an appealfrom a decree of the present Chancellor.. The causeof appeal was shortly this : A Mils Irwin, who was a ward of the court of Chancery, having received the addreiles of Loyd William Gordon had corifeiited to give him. her hand, with the approbation of her guardians, and of her mother whba&ed as trustees Under her father’s will; but the lady being under age ( but twenty years old ), and from certain circurnstances arising from the words of the testator, her deceased father, she came by operation of law a ward of the court of Chanceryas before ob - ierved; the consequence of which ivas, that ( he could not marry Lord William without the Chancellor’s consent.

- Oh this ' ground the lovers, With the approbation or sanction of the parent and guardians, ^ petitioned the Chancellor for leave to - marry, which petition was heard upon the merits, and was dismissed by his Lordship, chiefly for the following reasons

... First, As it would defeat the will, under which she derived her prpfent fortune, the intention of the testator, as the law j ftooft, being, that the young lady should not marry, till of 1 full age, tinlefs the person she might intermarry with should \ have a fititable fortune, and that her oWn should be so settled, I as to become a provision for Herfelf and children, or if not, 7 a j suitable, dower and provision should be settled and made for jj herfelf and children, out of her husband’s estate. j

Secondly, ( which was connefred with the foregoing ) Her ! intended husband was not enabled to ‘make any such provision, t having no fortune or property of his own. j

Thirdly, That sofar from being able to fulfil the intentions j of the will, he was lomethoufand pounds worfe than a beggar, I which debt or debts were to be paid out of the fortune of the j young iady ? when file arrived at full age, as a matter of j course, bechufe her fortune would then veft in her husband. I Fourthly, It would tend to defeat the remainder, which \ was expe ' franf on her death, in case she should not attain she \ age of twenty - one years, which gave the person in remainder \ a clear, legal, veiled title in the contingent estate, od her j death; which would be an act of pofitive injustice, because; it would be divesting the remainder man of a reverlionary, \ or conrmgetiT ^ eflateV without any equivalent.

T And -. flnally, it would defeat the intentibil, as ' Vvell as. legal j operation of the will of the testator, and open a door to let i aiide or. bar all such testamentary deviles.

The

•A. 1781. D - E B A T E S,

The counsel for the appellants were Mr. Maddox and Mr. Dunning, the former went very fully into the design,. motives, and policy of the marriage aft, passed in the 25th of George the Second, and demonstrated very ably the lingu ’ ar hardships which it imposed, even when ' confirmed in the ' mp t liberal and extensive manner, but contended, however rigorous, and iii ' many respects impolitic it might be, it was never designed or intended to veft the power exer -

cifed on the present occasion in the court below. - - - It was

merely passed, so far as it applied in the present infiance, to prevent young people from throwing themselves away, and - from making, a choice which was to endure for life, when the parties were not at an age lit to form a proper judgment. —~ But the ail specially, provided, that with the consent of parent and guardians, infants should always be at liberty to marry. The testator could not be ignorant of the law, and though in the present case a question arose, whether from, the previous conduit of the parent, guardians, and trustees, the young lady had not become a ward of the court; it was evidently clear to him, that it was equally agreeable to the equity of that court, the law under which the court below derived its power, and justice, in the particular case before ^ their Xordships, that the petition flioukl be granted, and the decree or the report made by the court of Chancery remitted back tp that court, or instantly reverfed,

Mr. Dunning with infinitew ^ t and ingenuity endeavoured to ridicule the new mode of courtship about to be established by the noble Lord oil the, woolfack, by his late decision ip another place.

‘ He contended, before that decilion could have the fap&ion of law or justice, this proportion miift lie antecedently efta - hlilhed. ee That to constitute happinefs in the married Hate, or legalize anuqion between a rich infant and the man flic loved, an equality of fortune was indispensibly peceftary. ” jj ^ Iere tl\e ' yoqng lady publicly avowed her attachment to his client. Het her only surviving parent, approved

of her choice, and the guardians under the will chearfully and without reserve consented to; it ?.

If the court befow proceeded on any solid ground, it could be only this : the preventing the young lady from. taking an improper step, or if the ft. ep. was proper, interfering left the contingent interest veiled in the person in remainder should be affected, contrary to the intent of the devise, as connected with the operation of law.

S 3 That

P A R L I A ME NTAR Y; A. 1781.

That young ladies, if left entirely to themselves, under the sudden iinpulfe of love, might act imprudently, - he was ready to acknowledge, and when the fa& or appearances proclaimed this, the discretionary interpolation of the court below was in his opinion very proper. It was clearly a wholesome exercise of that patronage, care, and prote&ion, which the ancient law in some instances, and the legislature in a particular one, had vefted in the Chancellor for the time being; but in the case before their Lordships, no fraud or imposition was pretended. The parties were ail fully informed on the ibbje&. The noble Lord, so far from wilhing to impole on the young lady, her mother, or her guardians, had with all possible honour and candour, an honour and candour befitting his birth, rank, and personal character, laid his situation before them, even to the moil minute particular; and yet, strange as it might found, his opennefs and aimoA unprecedented ingenuity proved the very cause of his present embarralTment, nothing being easier, if he harboured any intention of mifleading - the court, than to make out a case for it, which should put an end to ail future doubt, embarralTment, or enquiry ., f

He urged this argument in a variety of shapes, and said the queilion, which properly came to be argued at that bar, was clearly, by what rule {he eftwnated her own happinefs, what she was about to part with, and what to receive in return, and upon the whole, after weighing the intrinfic value of both, making her option; or whether, after the most fcru - pulous companion, {he would not be happier if wedded to the man Are loved, than {lie could be with any other, however opulent, or in a single date ? This was a matter, when thus considered and fully matured, which could concern her, and her only, and he had no doubt, whatever the noble Lord who presided in the court below might think on the subje£V, relative to persons of fortune intermarrying with I persons equally wealthy, his Lordship; would nevertheless agree with him, that the standard of ideal happinefs, which. he had rireafured, could not operate an inch beyond the circle of his own bread. Indeed he n e v C r ' underdood, nor hardly ever heard, that settlements and equality of fortune lerved to unite hearts, though he knew in a thousand indaii - pes that they united hands. s

• The only point which remained to be considered, or which I indeed admitted of any serious question, was this, that if j permission were given to the parties to marry, that the even - j

tvtal j

33

[ A. J78i. D E B /A, T £ S.

| tual interests of others who would/He entitled to claim under ! the will, should the young lady : die unmat ried, might be thereby affected. To this he would answer, that when the lady should attain the age of twentyrone years, she might dispose of the fortune, as she liked, and if on the difmifTal, of the present appeal / she should marry, and have a child or; children begotten during her. nonage; in that event they would take and of course bar the remainder, so that in neither I event would the interest of those in - remainder be afre&ed.

; If ( he married and had no child, and should die before, she attained the age of twenty - one, the person or persons in re - i mainder would take under the will; if she married ' under ! age without consent of the court of Chancery, and had children, the remainder would be barred; consequently the consent of the court - was no more than a mere matter of form,

| for it could give or fubtrafl nothing, nor create any estate, which was not before in being.

On the whole as the idea of an equality of fortune seemed to him to establish a false principle of matrimonial happinefs, equally repugnant to natural freedom and connubial harmony, he made no doubt but their Lordships, who were equally competent to judge with the first lawyer in the Hall, or that House, would agree to the reverCal of the decree made in the court below, and give directions for a fuller consideration and for granting the pray er of the appellants ’ petition.

THe question was put, without a single word, from within the bar, and affirmed though the Earl of Abingdon role and attempted to speak, but was informed, that the question was already disposed ' of.

The House adjourned at five o ’ clock to Wednesoay.

It was pretty remarkable, that within three days, one bro h. - r ( Lord George Gordon ) should be tried for high tre « » son at the King’s Beach bar, and the other ( Lord William ) be a suitor at the bar of the House of Lords to take off an interd < ft laid upon him by the Court of Chancery, not to marry a rich heirefs, who was ready to be ' stow on his Lordship her heart, hand, and fortune. The former was however lucky enough to be acquitted, and the latter equally fortunate, by the young lady’s bichiing defiance to the trammels of law, and rendering h ' erfelf and him happy a few days afterwards at Gretna Green.

February

' ^ 34 PARLIAMENTARY. A. 17 Bi.

February 14.

This day, as soon as the private business was pver, the Lord Chief Baron delivered the opinions. of eight of the judges in the case of Ambrofe and Hodgfon, it being an ap. peal from a decision of the Court of King’s Bench. —rThe opinion of that - court - of was affirmed on the principle that the Word heirs in a testamentary devise, are words of purchase, not of limitation. " I

Lord The House was about to adjourn, when Lord Abingdon rofe

Abingdon, and renewed his complaint concerning the precipitation with which the House had proceeded to affirm the decree on the appeal brought before their Lordships by Lord William Gordon, as to his marriage - with Mifs Irwin, on Friday last. His Lordship reprobated this unjuft and jlovenly rapidity in terms of great asperity, and said that he intended to have troubled the House with his sentiments upon the subject, if he had not been prevented by the extraordinary and premature determination to which they had been led.

Lord Chan - The Lord Chancellor contended that the mode observed upon tiibr. the occasion alluded to by his Lordship, was exactly that which was invariably praftifed in all similar situations. He was always happy that all the judicial proceedings which came tinder his cognizance, should be carefully and deliberately difeuffed, and he was fi nee rely lorry that any accidental occasion should have impeded such a difeufiion in the case in question.

Lord Ab ' ir. gm Lord Abingdon was not at all convinced that the impediment 6r ' alluded to by the noble Lord on the woolfack. had its origin in accident. His Lordship he said laboured under no defect of lungs, if he chose to exert them, and he declared upon his honour, that he had never heard him go through the uluai formal form in moving the House for their opinion upon ifae subject then before them. A noble Duke he said had conic down for the express purpose of giving his negative to the question; and he called upon the noble Duke to declare whether or no he had not been deceived by the precipitate manner in which their Lordships ’ supposed opinion had been taken and declared, and whether it was not every way fair to : contend that it was an aft clearly without the concurrence of the noble Duke and himself, and of courie respecting them a nullity as members of that House

Lord Che The Lord Chancellor informed the noble Lord, that he ar aihr. gued from a total mifconception of the regular niode of prc « ceeding in cases like that in which he complained of impro per precipitation. N It was never usual in cases of appeal fori i an |

£ > ^ B A T ‘ E S.

any - negative torbe put upon a motion for affirming a decree ^ but if "any noble Lofd chose to ' object, the proper and established method was - for him to rife up and move the; House for reverting the decree in ^ ueftion. - —Neither his Lordship, nor - jany Other noble ’ Lord5 had done that, though due time had been given fort such a motion previous to the question having been put in the usual form from the woolfack, and therefore when this was ultimately put, the time was loft for urging a negative, and it would have been ufelefs and superfluous in him to have flopped a moment between putting the motion for affirming the decree and ordering it, - such a suspension never being the practice in similar situations.

Lord HillJbarough ^ Xzintd to the House, that he fat nearly Lord Hfflf - at as great a distance from the noble Lord on the woolfack as bomgh, the noble Earl Who had before {poke upon this subjefr, andi he declared that he heard the question put with all due form, and the word affirmed, prenounced in terms perfectly dif - fm£t, and in a voice perfe£tly audible.

Lord Afarcbmotit fpokfe to the orderoftheir Lordships pro - - La. proceedings, and confirmed thef fact, ' and gave a minute hiftory mont. of the established euftoni in cases fiinilar to the present.

After some trifling conversation, Lord Abingdon suspended his cornplaints/ anefthe House adjdurned to the next day.

' February t$.

As fbon as the private business ' was over, the Duke of Bolton rofe, he said, to make a motion, in consequence of the papers he moved for previous to the recefs, ' the purport of which, he prefumed, had been fuffieiently explained upon a former day. He : reminded their Lordships, that he said, when he moved first for the papers, he meant that their production should lead to an enquiry into the loss of the outward - bound East knd West India convoy, which Was captured by the Spanish Admiral ( Don Cordova ) last summer.

He had good reason to believe that such a disaster Could not have - happened but through grofs neglect fbmewhere.

He looked upon the loss of that fleet as a very ' singular misfortune; and of eburfe it was Worthy of the attention of Parliament, and of importance to both Parliament and the nation, - to discover the cause or causes of that fatal disaster.

Neither the object of His motion, nor the mode he had firuck out, was Unprecedented orun usual. Government was in - Siufied with the profb&ibmbf the state, and enabled by the fiatiohto execute the fruft reposed iii it. 7 When government m ■ _ : — -

" 7th November; 1780.

. a - therefore

r$6 PARLIAMENTARY A.. 781,

therefore : failed. inafaithfulpr abledischarge - of its duty, minister ' s and every department, of the e ^ eeutiye. government were, responfibie and amenable. tO/ Parliament. Their, Lord - ? : flips ’; journals : exhibited ' n\apy. repeated, proofs Of the exercise of that controul - in the reigns of Charles the ' pirfl and Second, and King William aii. d Queen Anne > : He trnfted ^ > therefore, : that, he should not hear it objected to him, on the ground of : wantrof ufage .; Heftillhad lefs right to expert it; as the motion he - intended tetintake; vvas a matter of course, no more ' than to < take. up the papers nowpn the fcabje, and in possession of the House, and referring them to a committee of the whole. House .; He. moved, ‘\ce That this -. House. - will, on Monday fe ’ nnight, esquire Into the,; vcpndu£t of the navy, and the cause of t - heilofs of that valuable. convoy : of fiore - TKe Earl of ships, /vi£luallefs, and merchant - ships, ' in : Anguft last. ” Sandwich. q; he Earl of Sandwich rofe to oppofe the motion. He by no; means approved of the introducing into the motion an enquiry into the conduct of the, navy, in thcjmanner proposed.. by the noble Duke, while. the : motion itfelf ‘imported no more than a.. mere enquiry, into, a particular transaction, thelofs of, the outward - bou nd, Eafl; and West - India : fleets. He had no obje&ioi ) to thev latter - partt - of themotion, jbut. thought, upon raariy accounts, it, would be1 extremely. improper, if not dangerous, to go into an pnquiryonthe former. He begged leave; to aff; ire. their Lqrdships ', that he had no fear on his own account, but in rhi ^ pjpipn, yypyfd. benot at all, pro. -, dent to laybefore - the public, and - of courfej - in procefs of time, our enetnies, ., the ) ftateiand. condition; of our fleet, and every thing; which di reftly, orindi re£Uy related to it. —As for,

- the enquiry into, the lofspf the convoy, no inconvenience could now arise from any communication relative; to it; and he afiured the noble Duke, that, conscious of the propriety and re&itude of liis own condu&j, as presiding : at the Admiralty - Board, he was every way. ready and prepared to, have that matter lifted to the bottom. He wiflied the noble Duke, who must know as well, the mature of such; an enquiry as his motion imported, to consider. what, a :, variety of objects it would embrace, and what a number of documents it would call under their Lordships ’, consideration. - No lefs than the number of ships, guns, men, rates, &rc; nay, even their coti - dition, state, and equipment, the very timber in the dockyards, and every thi ng coming within the description of naval, llores. —Under the reservation of confining the enquiry - to the loss of the convoy exciufively, he - begged once, more to allure the noble Duke lie had not the leaft objection.

A. i ? 8r £ > E B A T E Si 137

Duke of Bolton replied, that his motion was not meant to DuIce of Bring on a general enquiry into the state of the navy—it was ^ 0 ^ ” only directed to a. particular tranl ' attionj specifically pointed out, and depending solely on the papers laid on their Lord - ships ’ table before Christmas. When he therefore moved the words, conduct of the navy, he only infer ted them in his motion to enable him to go into the lubje£t which was to come under their Lordships, consideration. The purport of his motion was limply this—to enquire into the conduct of the navy, so far ' aS it related to the loss of the convoy. The noble Earl ' should know that such arf introdu£lion was ne -, cessary; and to convince his Lorclship that Ins motion imported no more, he - was willing either to alter it himself, of to acquiesce in whatever amendment the noble Earl should propole, in order to remove the objection of a general enquiry into the navy. He could hardly have imagined ;, when he first rbfe, that the noble Earl would have taken the ground lie did. —He prefumed, when the noble Earl not only ac - quielced in the motion, at the time it was firffc made, but iii a manner made it his own, by moving and carrying an amendment; that he could afterwards with propriety rife to oppofe it, or which was worfe, endeavour obliquely to defeat it.. The noble Lord anticipates the conduct of others by pointing out what he would do himself. The ' conduct of the navy, fays his Lordship,. includes every thing belonging to the havy; —certainly every part of it which applies to the loss ' of the; convoy, and : no more. —He wished; however, that noble Lords would only attend for an in - liant; for by the fame mode of arguing every circumstance or question relative ’ to the loss of the convoy, if the motion were worded in that way the noble Lord would defeat by answering, or rather preventing any answer being given, by laying, that the question, though it related to the lots like - wife, went, to an enquiry into the conduct of the navy. —=•

Thus, under, the semblance of an enquiry, all information at lealt, such information as would enable their Lordships to determine, whether there vras any blame incurred, and oy whom, wouldbbe either withheldj imothered, or evaded *

Hovv it was possible - ’ To proceed, unless ' the motion went in the form he had drawn it up, he was at a loss to conceive; and why it might not go in that form he could not tell, —it could disclose no secret; it would do no harm; it could convey no ! improper information to our enemies. The noble Lord indeed confessed as much : but he could perceive the poble Earl was fore 5 the conduct of the navy and every Vol. I T circuai -

t3S PARLIAMENTARY ' A. 1781.

circumstance belonging to it, created an alarm in the noblc Earl’s breast. —The noble Lord did not want to be told, tha it was not his intention to go at large into the subject of the Rate of naval affairs; —he meant only to go into so much1 of it as related to the loss of the convoy; consequently, if the noble Lord was serious in his obje ' &ion, he had his free leave and consent to modify it in such a manner as to entirely remove all objection, by restrainirig the motion to the cap - ture of the convoy.

The/ ? arlof The Earl of Sandwich remarked, that when he said he had L - tf/j. iut. ). no to tjje iatter part of the noble Duke’s motion,

he by no means wished to beunderstood as approving of it, and the realon he had was this—Captain Moutray was liable to be tried for the loss of the convoy; and if the present proposed enquiry was to go on, and any deciiion should take place, their Lordships might think him guilty or innocent, though a court martial might think otherwise. He did allure the noble Duke he had no manner of obje£tion on his own account. The Admiralty, he would be bound to maintain ^ had performed their duty; but he would be sorry that the House should come to any prejudgment on the condu£t of an absent officer, who. would‘be brought to trial regularly, in the way of his profession : if their Lordships should, however, determine otherwise, he would chearfully acquiesce, At all events, in the form the present motion was framed, it it was impossible he could give it his assent. The motion was to be sure general in words, but was nevertheless specific in its obje&— - no lei ' s than ah enquiry intp the conduct of the navy——and the loss, &ci

Here the first part of the paragraph took in ' the whole of ’ the navy, and every thing belonging to it, number of ships, men, guns, rates, itations, even ' to an account of the stores, and the quantity of timber, in the yards, &c. On this ground ) he should let his face against any modification of the motion, ! ualefs the first part of it was left out,. nor did he think that even the latter part of it was regular. 1 The noble Duke before Christmas moved for Tome papers [ Admiral Geary’s and Captain Moutray’s lettersj; the proper and regular motion, therefore, : in his opinion, - was neither the, conduct of the navy, nor even the loss - of the convoy, but to move that theii Loldships be summoned upon a certain day for the purpof of taking thbfe papers into confederation. •

The Duke T ' he Duke of Holton laid he was not surprized ' that the no Uch ^ n. ble Lord had ib suddenly shifted his ground, and Red fron

an

s

A. 1781. D E B ATE S.

and deserted his first argument; that it would be improper at this jun&ure to go into an enquiry into the conduit of the navy; for it was now evident that his JLqrdship was determined to shrink from all enquiry, and particularly into one which might be the means of satisfying their Lordships that thelofs of ' the convoy arose frop the criminal negleit or ignorance of the admiralty board. The noble Lord was con - icious, that if the able and honest officer who commanded the grand fleet last summer was brought to that bar, he would deliver testimony which would prove the total ignorance of those to whom the direction of naval affairs was committed.

He would prove that they. gave such orders as no man ought to obey, or could -, understand. It would appear of a piece with all the rest of their conduct, with their giving orders to the late Sir Charles Hardy, with forty ships of the line under his command, to fly from an enemy very little superior, in the very channel. An enquiry into the condu£l of the navy would diiclofe, the reasons which suggested the disgraceful measure of our fleet which was sent out last winter in order to intercept the French convoy, to wait for the enemy till they got a fight of them, and instantly fly into port from them, and leave our own returning East India fleet to the mercy of the enemy, or to the mere chance of a fortunate mistake,, These were matters that would, and must be enquired into at Lome future day; and he was not lurprized that his Lordship should expreis so much anxiety to defeat any measure or potion which might lead rjiat way.

The Earl of Sandwich was much pleated, he said, ' to find that The Earl he had discovered the drift and tendency of the noble Duke’s Sandwhb motion. What fell from the noble Duke in his last speech put it beyond question that his intention was by a fide wind to lead their Lordships into an enquiry into the conduct of the navy, under a. pretext of enquiring into the cauies of the lofsof the convoy. His Grace now acknowledged that he; meant to bring a, very respestable officer [ Geary ] ] to tlvir Lordships ’ bar, and he prefumed all the other officers he had mentioned.

He would never fit silent ^ and hear any officer’s conduce aj - raigned. There. was riot an abler nor. a braver officer in the service tfian he whom the noble Duke reprel ’ ented as flying into port as soon as Jie deferied the enemy [ Darby j he was sent to wait for. That officer never fled from the enemy, nay, never kept out of their way, nor avoided them. Neither had he. ever got fight of them though some of the frigates belonging to his squadron detached for the purpose gf defery -

T z ins :

Q

49

Lord

Stormont.

The Lord Chjnr. dtor.

PARLIAMENT ARIL A i; St,

Jng them had. He kept the Tea, and of course he did not dishonour the flag. It is true that perhaps he did not seek them, and he a£ted right, confide ring the great disparity of force. When Admiral Darby got a fight of the enemyj his squadron confided of but seventeen, whereas the French consisted of thirty - eight, if riot fortyVfour ships of the line. Wai his not endeavouring to - compel the enemy to come to an engagement with such an inferior force any dilgrace or neglect of ' duty ? He trusted it could not b® deemed so; but, on the contrary, reflected the highest : honour on the officer who had at once the prudence and resolution “neither to rafhly precipitate an engagement under such manifeft disadvantages, and resolution and gallantry to put himself in the way of an enemy lo vaftly superior, and not decline the combat.

Lord Stormont laid, he did not mean to rife upon the present occasion, because he looked upon the motion which the noble Duke intended to make as - no other than a motion of course, to lake the papers moved for before the recels off the table. Such being the case, he. owned he was astonished to hear the noble Duke enlarge his motion, or rather to make one ellentially different from that, which their Lordships - ' prefumed, they were summoned to discuss; and he believed, except the noble Duke himself, and fuph noble Lords as his Grace might have thought proper to cqmmunicate his intentions to, there was not a noble Lord present who - was, or could be apprized, that a motion, merely for a particular paper, or letter, meant to include an enquiry into the condu£t of the navy, and the vaft mafs of information such an ^ enquiry would draw after it. — The proper motion therefore, in his apprehension, would ' be, to order that said papers or - letters, be taken into consideration on such a day—whatever day the noble Duke shall or may think proper - to propofe,

The luoyd. Chancellor was of opinion that neither of the noble Peers. who had spoken was in the right on this occafi - on,. The objection that had ' been urged by the noble Lord, at the bead of the Admiralty against the motion, which vvas in the pofl ' eflion of their Lordships, was certainly not a good one, for ip could not be for a moment supposed that thfe noble Duke could derive any power of entering into a general enquiry into the ffate of the navy from the terms of his motion,. because he had not only already explained his particular object in the inftipution of this enquiry, but had expressed what was the foie moti ve and obje£i of making the motion at the time. Undep these circumstances, the noble Duke must - •, have

4

A. 178 *. ... DEBATES.

have been conscious that he could have no power of commencing. an indiicrirninateinveftigation in consequence of a motion so limited in its. form. ! But though this was in his idea, no valid objection to the enquiry in question, there was another very substantial one, and that was, that such an enquiry was : inti rely premature as to the time of its being instituted : it would at present be a Very unjuft and unpardonable anticipation of another and more solemn enquiry, a legal enquiry into the conduct of the captain who had the command at the time; that this fleet was captured. —He. underftoOd that Captain Moutray was to be tried for his behaviour on this oc - caslon, and it would be totally inconsistent with the justice of that House to proceed to a decision upon a subje£t which mighty in its consequences, affect the ultimate judgment that : was to be entertained by a regular court martial concerning this officer. If, after that House had gone, thro ’ their enquiry, and had come to a resolution in consequence, that the guilt in this transaction belonged to a quarter which Capt. Moutray was not at all concerned in, then they would befuf - pending the natural operation of a judicial enquiry, by their anticipation; for it would seem absurd to try Capt. Moutray, after the first court of judicature in the kingdom had, by a fe - rious and solemn decision, pronounced him totally innocent. If, on the contrary, they should at the termination of the inquiry wished for by the noble Duke, declare that the principal guilt was chargeable to the officer, he would be subje&ed to the misfortune of going to a trial in which his fortune, character; and fife, were concerned, with all the weight of such a high, authority against him, and with every prejudice and bias that such a decision would naturally carry with it. On this account, therefore, he held it quite improper to prosecute the enquiry moved for by the noble Duke; but he wished it to be understood as his opinion in general, that the noble Lords were extremely miftaken if they supposed they possessed a right of ' bringing every little occurrence under a parliamentary examination. —rlf this were the case, if every trifling loss which occurred in the unavoidable chance of war, were to be brought before that high tribunal, there - was an end. to; executive government, it could proceed no farther; the political machine must flop, and the business of the kingdom must Hand still. —But that was by no means the case; for in his opinion no doctrine could be at once more impolitic, and more unconflitutional than the establishment. of such a power in either of the deliberative branches of the legislature.

J4 PARLIAMENTARY A. i; 8f

ture. All that could be done at any rate in the present in - Rance, was to move for a day for the papers which had already been laid before their Lordships to be read, as it was im - possible they could in the natural course of things proceed to I build an enquiry upon any papers which had never been previously read to them. He for his own part had not perufed the papers which had been laid before the House in consequence of the noble Duke’s motion, and was not therefore competent to Ipeak or determine concerning any subsequent motion which might be founded upon them. —Other Lords might poffibly be in the fame predicament, and it would of course be altogether improper for them to accede to any thing else in the present Rage of the business, but to the appointment of ' some future day for having the contents of the papers in question properly and carefully read to them.

1A. Dudley Lord Dudley laid, he objected to the motion when it was firR made, because he foresaw it ' would lead to the very dil - euffion the noble Duke now apparently wished to bring ’ forward, that of an enquiry into the conduct of the navy, and

Of course into that of the admiralty board - He law the

motion in another point of view, that of leading to a judgment or opinion upon the professional conduct of an absent officer; in either event, whether as leading the House into a tedious, and in every sense, a very improper discussion, in the present critical Rate of public affairs, or coming to a decision. upon the condu£tof Captain Moutray, he thought the motion, made by the noble Duke, every way improper, ill - timed as to the season, and unparliamentary, as to the proceeding; because poffibly productive of injustice and prejudgment.

Duke of The Duke of Bolton observed, that the argument urged by

Bolv > n. the learned and noble Lord went rather too far for the ufe he obvioully intended it. The. learned Lord contended that their Lordships ought not to interfere in the conduct of the executive government upon every occasion. —He was ready to acquiefee in the general polition. —It would indeed be pro - > du£tive of nothing but inconvenience and confusion, if that House was to interfere, or attempt to controul government, upon every occasion; —but when he acknowledged this; he was ready to maintain, that circumstances sometimes arose, in which it was the duty of that House to controul the ex - erc. ife of the executive government; and when it would be highly criminal in their Lordships to neglect it. — - Tfiere was indeed another reason, which the noble and learned Lord fort ' ' got

A. 1781. DEBATES. 143

got to mention, and which would render the matter totally, impracticable, or the talk endless; for if their Lordships were to take up and enquire into every absurd and foolirn measure adopted by ministers, Parliament would have nothing else to do from day to day, but to esquire and to censure or punish the ^ public delinquents. — - The whole attention of their Lordships would have cohstant food for animadversion, and that of the most severe and unpleafant nature, were it to be ' taken up with remarks, upon even the tenth part of the ornilfi - ons, blunders, and the grofs wilful negleCts with which ministers were juftly chargeable. —Therefore, though the noble and learned Lord’s position might be extremely time, that it was not ftt that Parliament should interfere upon every ne - gle6l or omission of duty, this position was equally founded, that there might many circumstances arise, in the exercise of executive government, which if Parliament negledted to take notice of, they would be highly censurable.

He maintained that the admiralty board were highly culpable; that they neither knew how to draw up instructions, lo as to render them intelligible, or, when they did, that they were such as were or ought to be obeyed. The noble Earl knew this to be the case when the Channel squadron was last at sea - j - councils of war had been frequently held to decypher the instructions under which the admiral acted; but in vain; no man could make them out. Far be it from him, as had been infinuated by the noble Earl, to lay any blame to - Admiral Darby; he never thought of it. He only stated a fact, which every man was at liberty to argue upon who heard it; and the noble EarFs own confession clearly exculpated the admiral; it would have been rafhnefs in the extreme; it would have been madnefs in the admiral to have a£ted in any other manner than as he did. hut he foresaw that the inquiry was to be defeated at all events; Capt. Moutray’s trial was the pretext. He believed that officer, would never be tried; and thus the justice of the nation would be evaded, as the captain would be Ipaded with the implied blame, and Hand as afcreen between the nation and the admiralty board.

The Earl of Sandwich in reply Laid, it was the intention ofTheEarl of the admiralty board to bring the captain as speedily as polfible Sandwich, to a court martial ? orders had been sent some time lince to his commander in chfef, Sir Peter Parker, to bring him to a - trial; and propably before. now his trial was over, and he would be honourably acquitted. He knew there was no blame due to Captain Moutray; he was equally satisfied in re - spe < 5tof the admiralty board; and when he opposed the noble

Duke ’ s

144 PARLIAMENTARY A. - 1781,

Duke’s motion, he allured his Grace he had done ' lb from no other motive but merely to prevent the poflible clalhirig of opinion between that House and the court martial who may have tried him.

The Mar - The Marquis of Rockingham was very severe on the noble qu s of Lord who spoke last; reminding him of his former promifes

Reckwgbam. Qf piecjging himself repeatedly to that House of having a fleet equal, if not fuperiorV to the united force of France and Spain, and yet acknowledging in the face of the nation that theene my out - numbered us in the proportion of more than two to oneHating that Admiral Darby had under his command but seventeeii, while the f rench fleet conliHed of thirty - eight, if not forty - four ' of the line '

Earl of The Earl of SandvJich said, that this arose from accident; Sandwich, that the fleet, when riding at Torbay, conlilted of twenty - seven; four of whom, a first rate and three other large fhipsj were disabled in a Violent gale of wind; that another, the Alexander, commanded by Lord Longford, loll her malts, and that five more had separated and returned into port; confe -. quently, though Admiral Darby had no more than seventeen under his command, he would, but for those unfortunate cir - cumflances, have had twenty - leven.

The Mar - - The Marquis of Rockingham made a Ihort reply. Hefaidthis quis cf was a confessed inferiority of fifteen fail of the line; an in - Rackingbam. £ev ' lQT ^ y p0 great as not to befuppliedby any exertions of skill or courage : he recommended to the noble Duke to withdraw ‘his motion, as it was in vain to expert to derive any advantage From that or any other motion. That fide of the House had ' continued to predi£t consequences till all further efforts were ineffectual. They would not be agreed to; and if they were, he expend very little if any good from them. He feared the nation was ruined Beyond redemption; and such. being his. opinion, he should give himself no farther trouble.

Duke of - The Duke of Bolton retorted upon the Earl of S ' andwich,

* ridiculed the idea of numbering ships who had never gone to

sea, and said, the noble Lord might as well count those on the Hocks, as these that were obliged, to - go into dock to re pair the damages they, received in Torbay. This species of, the poflible, the probable, i he might indeed call if the improbable, recalled to his mind the old fiory; if such a thing happenedfuch another might have hapdened; and; then such a consequence would or might have foliowed~The simile, pursued further would found rather coarse; but. certainly ifie firing of suppositions, which had been Hated.. - \ by

■ Ai 178 *; D E B ' A T E S.

by - the noble Earl,. was equally ludicrious, extravagant, and improbable. It was the duty of the first Lord of the Admiralty to provide against accidents of, this ' nature, and if he had hot - men and ’ ships, atleaft to have ships ready to receive men upon such anoccasion. The want of the Alexander Should likewise be supplied in the fame manner. In short, the - whole of the noble Lord’s argument came to this, that twenty - two fail went out under Admiral Darby, ( he believed but twenty - one ) and that four or five of these returned into port for want of proper instructions; but suppofing they had all kept company, there were twenty - two British lent out to encounter forty - four French and Spanifh—thirty - eight french and fix Spanish, his Lordship having acknowledged that fix Spanish came to convoy the French to a certain latitude. From this public confession, he left it to their Lordships to judge how far the noble Earl, at the head of the Admiralty, had kept his faith with Parliament, after so repeatedly alluring it, that he would have at all times a fleet, if not superior, at leafl equal to cope with the united force of the House of Bourbon.

But it was not even the inferiority of the force for which Kiinifters or the noble Earl were so much to blame. It was the injudicious employment of the force we had,. During the - Summer jve had nothing or next to nothing to, apprehend from France : the Breft squadron was not in force or condition to venture to sea in a body,. They found themselves obliged to detach in lingle Blips, in order to collect a force at Cadiz sufficient tofecure and proteAl their trade fleets,. in their return home, and to draw the attention of the Bri - tafh squadron to the southward ., 1F therefore Admiral Geary had been ordered so cruize off, and to the southward of - Cape St. Vincent ’ s, and so pass the land latitudes, inflead of Capes Ortugal and Finisterre, one of these two things would have happened, either Don Cordova would nor Have ventured out of Cadiz, or, if he had, - he would be obliged to fight for that convoy which he captured without firing a Angle ( hot ! —Cordova had but thirty ships under; His command; Mr. Geary had twenty - eight, at leafl with the Ramilees; and from the condition of that fleet, consist - ing of three three - deckers, and nine seconds, besides the rest all seventy - foprs, one sixty - four ( excepted ) it was rear - Ibnable to hope with such a force, that if a/iecifjve victory would not have been the consequence, there was every fair ex - peftation of our being able to give an extreme gpod account

■ ' Yol, I. U of

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781,

of the enemy, and at all events, of protecting that convoy ? the lpfs of which he feared would prove so fatal to thi$ pountry. He allured the ' noble Earl, that although He jviftied to call Mr. Geary tp that bar, he, by no means intended to go at large into the conduct of the navy, yet he was free to acknowledge that in seeking the cause of the disaster alluded to, it would be necessary to alk that able and upright officer some questions; such he believed, if permitted to be put and answered, as would fully convince their Lordships that the instruflions under \yhicji that officer ailed were founded in ignorance, absurdity, and contradiction, and were the foie occasion of that mischief which afterwards happened, he meant the total loss of that valuably convoy, the most valuable in some. respe&s this country ever loft; and that independent of the mere loss of property, on two speciai accounts first, because it deprived pur squadrons on the Jamaica and leward Island Ration ? of those stores. in which they flood so eminently ’ in need of; and secondly, because it was the means of furnishing an enemy with those very stores, a supply they could not procure but with great difficulty or rifque in any other manner, at leaft not for the purpose of immediate out - fit and equips

ment.,

Nor was the conduct of the latter part of the campaign lefs pregnant with proofs of ignorance and incapacity. The noble tarl, with a degree of great affe&ed induftry, had endeavoured tp wipe away the censures supposed to be hinted or infinuated against the characters of the two officers who occupied successivety the chief command of the weftern squadron. —His L. ordship might have spared himself the trouble, and have taken some other more fit and convenient opportunity to make the eulogium or Thofe two gentlemen, and would besides have acted with more candour, had he confined himself merely to panegyric, without infinuating that the panegyric contained a reply to some obloquy attempted to be thrown on the admirals Geary and Darby. — ? With the former he had been long acquainted, and entertained a very high esteem for him, as a man, and respect, as an officer. He knew his abilities, his courage, and intrepidity j and retained no doubt but he bad faithfully and ably discharged his duty. Of Mr. Darby he knew but little, of his own personal knowledge; but from what he could learn, Jje believed him to be an able and a£tive officer. As to the pjjferyatiqus yyhich fell from his Lordship in the course of the ". : "debate/

147

A. 1781. t E ti A T £ Si

debate they evidently bore no relation to the professional conduCI of either Mr. Geary or Mr. Darby; they were directed against the Admiralty Board, which issued the orders, or drew up the instructions, under which those officers respectively acted. When, therefore, he talked of Mr. - Darby’s going out at an improper season, or having been obliged to return into port ^ he never intended to cast the leaft refle&ion upon hitn± It was the Admiralty Board who had lent him put with a force so totally inferior to that of the enemy, which inferiority was the causeof that gentleman’s being obliged to avoid the enemy, and having been in the end under the lieceflity of abandoning the protection of that very fleet he was sent out to fee safe into port, he meant the Eafl - Iridiamen, which were then daily expeCted to arrive ih fomepbrt in Great Britain or Ireland.

To point Put those dniiflions and riegleCIs, from the very mouths of the peffons concerned, was the motive he had for troubling their Lordships on the present occasion. That could not be expected in any other manner, but by enlarging the motion unless the noble Lord at the head of the Admiralty would pledge himself to the House, that all the circumstances respecting the capture of the convoy were permitted to be fairly gone into, and difcufifed. That the noble Earl did not seem willing to agree to; and he was not surprised; It tvas ah additional proof of his foresight and precaution he dreaded the corifequenees of a fair and impartial investigation; he was conscious that ' it would exhibit nothing but a fuc - cefiion of blunders, miftakes, and contradictions. One day, do this; the next do that; the third, an order for countermanding the preceding; - by which means, - the officers who acted ., or rather attempted to act, under such instructions, had no specifier object held out to them, and were at the fame time deprived of every aid drawn from their own knowledge and experience, having ho liberty to conduCI themselves agreeably to their own judgment or discret ion, and according to time, cir - cumftarice ^ arid opportunity. Thus it was, that when the fleet tvas last out, the rendezvous being changed, afterthe five ships parted company, they were not able afterwards to rejoin, but were riecefiarfly obliged to return into port. So it happened in a later inflance Councils of war were held to interpret the Admiralty iriflruCftoris, but in vain; in fine, ipch a mixture of folly and confidence was never exhibited in any naval ad - Iminiftration in this country fmce the foundation of the monarchy, as had been within a very few months. He law, [ however, that, if he perfifted in his motion, it would answer I V 2 ' na

PAR L I A M L N T A R Y. i AJitfi,

no ' purpose; for which reason, he should follow the advice o his noble friend, [ Rockingham ] and withdraw it; though he did not. in the leaft despair, but the time would shortly arrive when not, a partial, but a full inquiry would be made by their Lordships into the conduct of the navy.

February 16.

Appeal from Ireland : Cranbraffil against Taylor. Question, Whether his Lordship, as Chief Remembrancer of the Exchequer in Ireland, was entitled to privilege, as an officer of the court ? Determined in the negative, and the decree of the Lord Chancellor of Ireland affirmed.

Adjourned to Monday.

February 19.

NEW DOCTRINE of DIVORCES.

The order of the day, for the second reading of Gooche’s divor e bill. ’.

The abflradf of the evidence, on which the divorce was prayed, was as follows : A disagreement having taken place at Bath, in the year 177S, relative to an improper familiarity between one Rauzzini, an Italian cajlrato - finger, Mr. and Mrs. Gooche agreed to live separate; in consequence of which the latter went to reside in France upon a separate maintenance.

There the lady had not long resided before it was generally understood, or wished for, between the parties, to take the necessary measures for separating for life. ’ ’

The hrft fruit of those measures, as it came out in evidence, was, that her servant, a French woman, came over the next year, and a ' regular divorce or separation, a metifa et tbdro, being - sued in Dodor’s - commons, her woman gave such testi - mony of the criminal familiarity of her mistress with several French officers in divers places, that the parties were divorced.

It however came out, in cross examination at the bar, that this evidence, or, more properly speaking, the testimony of a single witness, was not deemed sufficient for a divorce, to be sanctioned by. the legislature, to enable the parties to marry again; on which, the servant woman returned to France, and in a short time afterwards it was so managed that a cook in the house at Calais, where Mrs. Gooche lodged, was called up one night, at eleven. o ’ clock, apparently with a view to be present when Mrs. Gooche was in bed with a French officer.

. The facts of criminal commerce, here mentioned, were the grounds of the present application; and the order of the day was read for the feconcl reading of the bill *

' ' As

Mifiu D“ E B A T E S. 14 ^

■ A ' sToon as the written and parole evidence was fifiished, the Lord Chancellor came from the woolfack, and spoke to the The Lord following - effect : His Lordship observed, that when perfonsc ^ ‘ ”Cf/ ^ r® came for redrefs to that. House, in ' matters respecting property, and when the event of the application affected themselves, solely and exclusively, it had been the establifiled ufage to qualify their claims, or concede or interchange their rights and possessions, as choice or ’ convenience might suggest, no person having a right to : complain where no injury could happen; but if an. individual, no matter of what description or condition, from the prince to the meanefl subject, fought fa -. vour or redrefs, the case was very different when the property j or personal rights of other persons came to be affedfed. Here j their Lor dships were called upon to perform an act of duty,

; which no external consideration or motive could justify in ne - jgledling or difpehjQng. with : here they were called upon to j interpole their authority, and to exercise that power with which - they were in veiled by the conllitution, as the guar - jdians of the rights and - properties of those. committed to their j care and protection; and to take care that no private concert lor agreement between parties should affect those who were not I properly, or in person, before the House, so as in the end to be productive of private injury or public mischief.

| ‘ It was upon this principle, he conceived, when appli - cations, such as the present, were made, that their Lordships jhad been at all times specially careful to lee that they did not originate in collusion, nor spring from motives, which, if gratified, might be productive of evil example, and operate as ? fan encouragement to a general corruption of morals among jperfons of a certain rank, condition, or ability.

\. Cafes sometimes happened, he was ready to acknowledge, jin which the parties applying had come ' as petitioners to their lordships, by mutual content; and yet, such agree - pnent riot amount to what he meantto describe by that spe - cies of collusion which he wilhed to discourage, he meant,

•where the criminality preceded any knowledge of rhe ' guilt, and where the diTeovery of the commission of the criminal act was accidental. Yet, when the discovery was incomplete, in the irll instance, and means had been devised by the consent of he parties, to furnish more relative and fuller proof, he mull onfefs he retained his doubts even of that species of collusion; for it would be; extremely difficult for their Lordships,

Suing as legillators in that House,. to be satisfactorily informed It what time. the collusion commenced, or whether the fame I means

£ A R L t A M & N t A R Y A, j}8ii

means of collusion, which laterally furritihed the complete evidence, might not have been still pulhed a little farther, and have suggested that which appeared incomplete.

The present case, - when fully lifted, he feared would b$ found to be pulhed still one step farther than the Iaft he had, mentioned; for, by the evidence delivered at the bar, no criminal act was so much as suggested previous to ' Mrs, Gooche’s retiring to France, and living in a state of separa - tionfrom her husband. It is true, the disagreemerit arose at Bath, in 1778; but no charge orcriminality is mentioned till some months after ihe arrived at Calais or Bolougne; This implicated doubts of a very suspicious nature, becauft in his apprehension it amounted fairly to this; that when dist agreements arise in the married state, no matter from what causej or squabbles however trifling in their nature, all the paN ties had to do would he to separate, and the wife to gratify ' herfelf, or perhaps pretend to gratify herfelf, in order to furnish proofs sufficient to enable both parties to marry again ;

Were their Lordships to give way, under the circum « stances he had described, it would defeat the avowed purposes for which the relief was fought, and the only purposes to effeift which it ought to be granted. It would open a door to every species of this fort of criminal gratification. It would cutafunder the most endearing ties of relationship, it would operate as an encouragement to immoralities of the most disgraceful nature, and poifon the fountains of domestic; felicity. It would hold out temptations to those who had nothing to regret in the married state, but that they were not single, to get rid of those restraints arising from their fa tuation, by acts which would, in fact, render them unfit for any honourable connexion, unless upon a. false principle of honour in their supposed or pretended, seducers.

To apply the general argument, with which he had prefumed to trouble their Lordships, it would not be imper < tinent or foreign to the subject ta corroborate what he now offered, as applied to the case before the House, to what had come out in evidence at the bar.

e Frances Portia, the cook, who had been called in as ad ' auxiliary evidence to make out a case fit for your Lordships confederation, tells you, she was called up at eleven o ’ clock at night, by Mrs. Gooche, at Rigourds, at Calais; for what purpose } to be a witness of seeing Dufmeneil and Mrs; Gooche in bed together; arid, upon farther inquiry, what more; did Ihe tell your Lordships ? that in a subsequent discourse, - I believe the next morning, Mrs, Gooche told the witness,

DEBATE S ;

hat the motive which induced her to call her up was, to give ividence of the fad : in England. ” iC If your Lordships wilt attend to the testimony of Ber - hould, the companion and servant, she tells you, that she ived at Chelsea, with Mrs. Gooche, where, ( he hired herfelf, md afterwards accompanied her mistress to Calais, Bolougne, st, Qmer ’ s, and back again to Calais; and that in each place she was a Witness to several criminal acts with the feyeiral French officers, whole names she has mentioned. She ha$ lot flopped there, Ihe has accompanied the relation of the raft with the avowed motives of her mistress for commit - : ing it; for she fays, her mistress informed her at the time if her intentions; nay more, before they departed from England, explained to her, what file intended by her proposed residence in France; adding, when in France, as in the case of Portia, that she [ Berthould. ] would be called upon as a rvitnefs in England.

“ Berthould accordingly returned to England, and gave evidence i n Dodor’s commons, by the directions of her mistress, and to whom did she apply ? to Mr. Woodcock, Mr, Goodie’s agent, who supported her, furnished her with money, and paid her her wages, See. Berthould, in her return to France, informs her mistress of what had passed. She is accompanied by Panchaud, Mr. Goodie’s servant, who, in - ftrufted by Mr. - Woodcock, brought over Frances Portia, the cook to complete the evidence, which Mr. Woodcock deemed incomplete to support a bill for leave to marry again, though fully eoippetent to ground a divorce, a menfa tttboro, in Dodor’s - commons upon. It is true, Mr. Woodcock, on whose veracity your Lordships, upon my own knowledge, may with safety depend, fays, Mr. Gooche was not privy to any part of the transadion, till after Berthould returned; but I would submit it to your Lordships, whether or nor, as there was no evidence of Mrs. Goodie’s criminal conduct, previous to her departure for France, and as her conduit in France seemed to be predetermined, or preconcerted, before her departure from England, by the intimation given by her tp Berthould before she left it, the [ > refent case, under these described circumstances, does not amount to a direct or implied preconcert to get rid of each Cither at all events, however disgraceful it might turn out to hemselves, their immediate family, friends, and ponnex -

i, ,. .. .. .. "l ‘ ^ ' ' 7

Hi ?

PARLIAMENTARY A; iy8r.

His Lordship said, he was satisfied that Mr. Gooche had; been extremely unfortunate, the criminality of his wife hav *, ang been proved beyond the possibility of doubt; but still it was equally evident, upon the face of the evidence, that the acts of infidelity were all proved to have been lublequent to the intention of one, if not both parties, to dillolve the bands of matrimony, in order to marry again.

In that point of view the case struck him, and as fuel ), agreeably to his judgment, it. came within the general exception which their Lordships had marked out when no other, reason was urged but the bare proof of criminality. Were the present bill to pass upon the idea of red refs,, where the injury proceeded from a preconcert between the parties themselves, and had been committed by previous consent, it would, as he had already observed, open a door to every spe - cics of immorality to private criminal gratification, to public, proibitution, and open fedu£tion.

He had since he enjoyed the honour of a feat in that House ileadily set his face against every attempt of the kind, and ever would. The present case, he confcflcd, in some re -, spe£ls, was a hard one, but it was not lb lev ere as ' it might appear, because it was not merely accidental, but fi£titipus. The queflion, however, could not be confide red any farther than it appeared from the evidence delivered at the bar. In that point of view, he had already fully conlldered it, and in that only could it now be properly decided upon.

For his part, he would never consent to the second reading of the bill, under the irnpr. efiions he received from the evidence now delivered; and if a motion should be made to that efiefi, he would find himself under an indispensable necessity of saying, cc Not content. ” Yet, as there appeared to him to be peculiar hardprips in the present case; and as they seemed to be so considered by several of their Lordships, who had heard the evidence, he was ready to consent, for one, that the farther consideration of the business fhouicl be deferred to some future day, as time and opportunity might suggest; suppose till Monday next.

The House adjourned, at fix o ’ clock, till Wednesday.

February 21.

This day the Lord - Chancellor and the House heard divine service in Westminster - abhey, it being the day appointed, as a general fall, to implore success to his Majesty’s arms; where a sermon was preached by the bishop of Bangor. - —Adjourned to Monday.

Fdr *

E B A T E S.. < 53

February zb.

The poftpOned ‘order of the ' day for the second reading of Bishop of GoocheV divorce - bill being read, the Bishop of St, &msid9s St. David ' u said, he begged leave to make a, few general obferVations as well on the bill itfelf as in reference to what fell from. the noble lord on. the woolfaek the last day the bill was taken into consideration. He informed their Lbrdships, that he had paid particular attention to the evidence delivered on the fub - je£t then before the House, and although he entertained the highest respect for every Word that the iioble and learned lord on the woolfaek delivered on any subject in debate yet in this matter it appeared to him, that there were very substantial grounds for differing in opinion with the sentiments which the learned lord exprefl ' ed on Monday last. He Ob - served there was ho general rule without an exception; and, confedpiently, that the present case might come within that. exception. Divorces were, it is true, of a very tender nature, and ought hot to be granted on flight occasions, or whereby a cOllufion of the - parties, the great moral obligation they had entered into might be frustrated without legal taufeii Me reminded the House that the evidence delivered at the bar on Monday last amounted to a full proof of Mrs.

Goodie’s criminality antecedent to any constructive coliufiofi that had been adduced between the parties. The wife’s fcah » - flalous and profligate Conduct had been fully proved to thfe House, but on the part of the husband not a particular was hinted, which could dead to a Angle circumftariee that there had been in his conduct the smallest deviation from coh -

$. 1781. D

jugal fidelity. - This was a point which he observed was well worthy. of their Lordships. consideration. He said it Would be hard case indeed, where so much guilt appeared on one lidfe, and lo much virtue on the other, that because the wife Wifiied tb ' be separated the husband should be bound to continue in matrimonial bonds, merely to add a£lual punish - inent to implied - dilgrace. He befeeclied their Lordships to take the petitioner’s case into a favourable conAderaiion, which they must certainly do if they paid proper attention to the Circumstanc ^ s on Which the divorce was prayed. It was a petition founded on the ftrorigeft evidence of Mrs. pooche ’ s. having defiled the marriage bed not in one, but ih nuitifareous iiistances. He had known Mr. Gooche from lis infancy, and lie could aver upon his own knowledge that tis private and public ' character were unexceptionable, His; afe was an unhappy pne, and from the mifery of his present Vol. I, ‘ %. Atuv

PARLIAMENTARY A. 17S1.

situation, he could only be relieved by their Lordships. He was ready to acknowledge, that the House and the public at large lay under very singular obligations to the noble lord on the woolfack. for his very laudable endeavours to establish a certain established species of relief, in all cases, where the parties were fairly entitled to come to Parliament; and he trusted that none of their Lordships, ' however prefumptiovis it might appear in him to say so, more earnestly or anxiously wished than himself to fee a regulation, such as had been hinted by the noble and learned lord the last day, take place.

If this found, safe doctrine was resorted to, as the unerring standard of their Lordships proceedings, in the present instance he thought himself justified in applying the rule to the case before their Lordships. There could not remain, in the breast of any one of their Lordships a single doubt, he prefumed, but that the infamy of Mrs. Gooche had been established by the most irrefragible evidence. It was no lefs manifeft, that the •avowed promulgation of the act proved, that besides the - mere vicious gratification, she looked farther; for she was ' not ' satisfied to be criminal, but she seemed desirous to proclaim and make it known, and for what reason ? Clearly to lay a foundation, for dissolving the bands of matrimony. He was so far, as the argument applied to the guilty person ( for otherwise it would be equally monftrous, absurd, and unjuft to punish one person for the guilt of another ) ready tp accede to the doctrine laid down by the noble and learned lord, that the committing a criminal act, with ah intention of dissolving the bands of matrimony, should always preclude the person so offending from any advantage they might promife themselves to derive from it.

Apply this d. octrinp in its general sense, pr confine it tp ’ thf particular subject under their Lordships consideration, and it. would preclude Mrs. Gooche from availing herfelf of her own wrong, though the person injured could not, or ought not jto suffer, by her misconduct. The motive whiph induced her to act ’ as she did, would be defeated, and strict and exemplar justice would be dealt out to both parties, while the noble and learned lord’s ideas would be perfectly fulfilled, namely, doing justice to the innocent, and punishing the guilty, bj withholding from her the object which she meant to obtain.

’ JBy what was proved at the bar it appeared, that the lad ].. had abted fpontaneoufty, as inclination ' prompted, and as he ! willies and expectations led. Of this it likewise appearei that her husband was totally ignorant till the injury had beei ~ fre ^ uehtly repeated; coplequently, in this infant stage 0

I A. 1781 r > - E B > ATE S.

Ithe business there could be no pre - concert or colluflon be I tween them. Nor was there the leaft suggestiorl, that he re - fcolle&ed, of any communication between Mrs. Gooche and Mr. Gooche’s agent, Mr. Woodcock, till after the return of BerthouId the first time from France, when the was called upon to prove the adulterous acts committed by her fmiftrefs in France, when examined at Doffors ' - commons. j The collusion being therefore out of the question, as ap - plying to the first acts of criminality committed in France ^ aS proved by Berthould, the present bill might receive their shordships sanction; and still the principle laid down by the 1 noble Lord on the woolfack be ftri&Iy and rigidly adhered ? to, that of discouraging and preventing, by every possible I means, the guilty party of profiting Of their own guilt, or of involving the innocent in the punishment only due to ithemlelves.

On the principle so ably stated by the learned lord on Monday he should move, that the bill, after being read a second time, be committed, for the purpose of new framing it agreeably to that principle, and the special circumstances which took it out of that general rule; in order on one hand to do justice to her much injured husband, and on the other to deprive her of those advantages which she hoped to derive from her miscondudif.

vThere was one great evil which arose from collusive or preconcerted agreements of the nature alluded to, that the wife was generally rewarded for her infidelity, and by the expectation of various kinds which were held out, was there by tempted to do what perhaps she would never otherwise have thought of, had not she a moral certainty of getting rid of the man - whom she had ill - treated, and under these impressions, bettering her situation, by an ample seperate pro vision.. '

He spoke, fie said, with great diffidence upon a subject in some respects so foreign to his habits, studies, and pursuits; he meant, so far as matters of this kind were connected with questions of property or civil judicature; but he hoped he could not err itn point of intention, when his foie and primary object was impartial and indifferent justice. On these motives, and on this principle, and in this perfuafion, while he totally disapproved, and in that so far agreed with the noble lord on the woolfack of holding out encouragement to married persons, much lefs to one of the parties, exclusively, to commit adulterous acts, he thought it would be adding actual injury to real misfortune, that the unfaithful wife

X % should

PARLIAMENTARY. A. 1781,

' should profit by her infidelity, so. far as. to put herfelf by hep

crimes; in a better fituition, or at leaft a more desireable one to hen, at the expence of the party injured; an unfortunate ^ and, perhaps doubly so, because an. affectionate Husband.

The Lord. ' Ths LoV ' d Chancellor rofe in reply He allured their Lord - Chancellor. ships, that when, on afor. mer pccasion, he made; ufe. of the word Gollufion, he did. not mean to ufe it with technical strictness .; the term was fuffiqieptly exprefiive of the idea an - nexed to, it,. to render all verbal criticifrn unpecefTary. And still whatever light the transaCtion may have appeared to the learned prelate, he was. yet to discover ' what other name to give the latter part of it, but.. coliufion arising from a preconcert; in the parties to do. or suffer a. criminal, €tr in order tp; lay a foundation ^ for that species of proof, which from its ppfitiye and corroborative nature, would be sufficient to induce their Lordships to pafsthe present bill.

, It; was true, that Mr. Woodcock Mr. G. oocheY agent, declared at the bar, the last day, that when Berthould. was in England for the purpose of proving the adulterous act committed by Mrs; Gooche at Calais, Bolougne, and St, Omer’s Mr Gpoche was totally ignorant that; - it might be deemed ne. cefTary tp have a secondwitnefs, to prove the criminality. at that bar, iri order to entitle the parties to marry again. He was prepared to give every degree of credit to what. fell ' from{a person of Mr. Woodcock’s known veracity and chaja&er; yet, he could not help observing, that the, mode of cojnduring this business, subsequent to Ber should’s returnh tp France, after having been examined at the Commons, created, suspicions in his mind, and he believed, would. create ?; suspicions in the mjpd of every one. of their. Lord/hips, extremely unfavourable to, the application made, by the parties now, praying relief.

Here his Lordship Hated the whole of the evidence pretty much in, detajl, and made several pointed observations on Mr. Gfooche’s eondudt, from thefirft disagreement, in 1778, to the present time, by which it appeared, he, fajdj that he iuf - fered his wife - to go whither she liked; in cQnfequence of which she v ? ent to France, where ( he remained eighteen months, —On her return to England, she lodged at Mrs. Macdonald ’ s, at Chqlfea, where she met with Berthould, and hired her as a companion or servant. Mrs. Qooche; thus accompanied, goes, to France a second time, and what. happens in consequence ? Berthould, whoseems to.. have. been hired for the purpose, is made privy, to her adulterous; acts, with several French officers at Calais, Bolougne, apd St. Omer’s ;

debates.

apd there ^ a ofie striking circumstance which he wished to prefs, on > their Lor dship’s reeolle&ion; - that, during the first eighteen, months Mrs. Gooche lived. separate,. there had not been the leaft : charge or suppofitiQn of her infidelity. That however was not the case; On Berthould’s return, Mrs. Gooche, as it should seem to him, being informed that, the proof was incomplete, calls up Frances Portie to be a. witness to her infamy at Rjgo. urds which Frances Portie, in the cpurfe of her evidjen. ee,. acknowledges that Mrs, Gooche ask - cd her, was nofcfhe Curprifed upon being called up to ber. bed - fide the preceding : evening, at so late an hour, and on such an occasion f adding at the fame time, tc you will probably, be called; to give. evidence of this, in England. ”; Finally ^, he would fubaiit it to their Lordships, whether the fending Panchaud, Mr. Gooche’s - servant, to bring over and : accom - pany Berthould and Frances Portie, to give evidence at their Lordships. bar, did not. afford - strong ground of suspicion,. though perhaps it did notamonnt to actual proof, that the whole, of the business, from the Autumn of 1779, when Mrs. Gooche left Chelsea, accompanied by Berthould, was preconcerted between her on one fide, and at leaft by the agents : and friends of her hiufhamd oil tfc® other ?

He feltras much as any man poflibly could for Mr. Gooche’s unhappy situation. He had an high respe£fc and esteem for his family, with some of whom he had lived upon a footing of the most - friendly intimacy, particularly whh his uncle, when at college; from which circumstance, he trusted, Mr. Gooche and his. friends would attribute his present conduit as merely arising from a sense of duty; for he could with, sincerity aver, were he to /indulge his. personal feelings, and give way to the natural bias which hung upon his mind, he would, instead of oppofing the relief fought, be one of the most forward in granting it.

In farther confirmation of what struck him on the prima facie evidence of the nature and quantity of the proof itfelf, and notwithstanding the great. reliance he had upon the assurances given by Mr. Woodcock, there were other stories afloat without doors. He had himself heard different accounts, in difeourfej and had received several anonymous letters, strongly contradicting the case attempted to lie made out at the bar, all which, went to confirm the suspicions he had already suggested. He had < indeed. received one from the lady herfelf,. in which ( he informed him, “ if all circumstances were difclosed, it would exhibit something very different from what had been given in evidence at the bar. ” -

Such

P A R L I A M R NrT A R Y A. 1781.

Such being the ' general idehs he entertained on the subject, : he must fairly acknowledge, that he could not agree with the learned prelate’s motion, for fending the bill a committee; and when, as an act of duty, he should be called upon to put thequestion, he wished to make known his intention of ^ giv - ing that question ' a negative, at the fame time ' anxious that their Lord{hips should be fully perfuaded, that he had no wish one way or other, farther than his conduct was meant to tally with a conscientious discharge of his duty. This however he thought fit to intimate, if it Was their Lordships opinion, that the bill ought to be fentto a committee, he, was determined not to oppofe it in any future stage.

The learned Prelate, had, in his opinion, very properly distinguished between the well founded claims of innocence and the punishment that ought ever to await guilt, and while he urged the propriety of withholding relief, when it did not arise from guilt, antecedent to the knowledge of the party, injured, id eji, the husband, endeavoured to apply that prin - ciple, by confining, in the present instance, the relief to the party injured, and precluding thereby and defeating the views of the guilty person, which the learned Prelate, for ought that appeared to him, was the principal motive that induced, her to that infamous conduct, and finally, to prevent her from enjoying the advantages she promifed to reap from it, ] that of an ample settlement.

This, he confessed, was plaufible, and seemingly founded in distributive justice, but he much doubted of its pra&ibili - t - y, agreeably to the principles of law and the establHhed ' rules of administrating this species of judicature, or rather legislation, in that House. Suppofing it however for an instant, that no obstacle, as he was about to fuggell to their Lordihlps, should Stand in the way, he doubted much, of the equity of such a procedure, under the Strong circumstances to which he had so often alluded in the course of his speech,. He would not venture to say of actual premeditated collusion, in all its parts and circumstances, but most clearly of subsequent mutual consent. Mr. and Mrs. Gooche came to their Lordships bar as petitioners, or suitors, whose prayers ^ claims, and respective rights, were clearly separate and distin£t. It was evident at all. events, let the transaction have originated where or how it might, there was one point which; could not adipit of any controversy, that Mr. Gooche had previously agreed to certain arrangements; in return, for which, Mrs. Gooche undertook to furniSh him with these proofs, which v/ere necessary to effect the diflolying of the marriage con -

ID E BAT E S.

tract. The criminal proofs were, the value received on. one fide; a provision for the wife was the valuable cpnsideration to be received on the other; it. vvould const ? quently, be inequitable, as well as repugnant to the known. principles and rules of law, to extort confessions under the idea of good faith, which were afterwards to beTolely employed to the advantage of the other party, and to the detriment, of the party confdfing ;

But independent of the impropriety, or rather actual injustice, of carrying into execution one part of the chrifentaneous transaction, should the learned Prelate’s ideas, prevail, he looked upon it that such a scheme was totally impracticable, were the established mode of proceeding in that House to be conformed to respecting all acts of legislation, and he begged permission; to make himself perfectly underwood on this part of the question.

The bill, as presented to that House was. a bill upon certain faCts therein stated, and offered to be proved in order to lay a ground for the dissolving the marriage of the parties, to give them leave to marry again, and to make certain a provision for the petitioner’s now wife. The bill is read, a first and second time, and the motion made by the learned Prelate is to fend it to a; committee. So far the established mode of proceeding is strictly adhered to; but an exception being taken, to the conduf ) : of one of the parties, namely Mrs. Gooche, that she committed the adulterous acts which have been proved oir her, in order : to give efficacy to this bill, and of course to marry again; and suspicions, not amounting to proofs,. having been suggested against : Mr. Gooche ' by ' his friends or agents, that he had been privy or co ' nfenting to those act. s, or had preyiously consented to their commissiori, the learned Prelate, eager for justice, ' and in order to discriminate the guilty from the innocent, strikes out what appears to him a middle path, ., He. recommends to fend the bill to a committee, in order to cure the original defect, that of permitting the prefumed guilty party of profiting of her own wrong, which he prefumes will retnoye all farther objections to its passing. He begged leave, however, to set the learned Prelate right, fefpeCting one thing which he Teemed to have overlooked. The"bill, agreeably to their L ' ordships mode of proceeding, could not be amended in the committee; the principle of the Jji. ll was directed to three objects; to diflolye the marriage; to give leave to marry again, and to make a provision for Mrs. Gooche. This constitiituted the whole of the principle of the bilj ^ which had already received their Eordships fane -

flb \ '. PARLIAM£KT A R Y A. i$

tidii. The principle, it; was true, ' might be modified; It might be enlarged aitd extended; by the introduction of new clauses, but could never be ' altered; confetJuCntly there was no other alternktiTe novHless biit to purAiS the ' principlrof the bill faithfully; or, by withdrawing it ^ begin tie ndvo, and frame a new bill upon the principle redomittendeil by the learned Prelate. ' r; ‘

. He, had Jong before he had the honour of a feat in that House, and too Often lince, beheld with no small degree of diflati ^ Ctidri, ' the manner and grounds of procuring divorces in Jthat House, " ahd Was sorry to say; that they frequently approached to the ' ludicrous, if not the downright ridiculous, and in every fenie might be Well deemed unbecoming the dignity; the gravity, and justice of that House; and iiri Site, were a dffgrace to the legislature itfelf, which should never, upon any. account, be. put in situations tend ' i ing to exciteleVity and ridicule.

No perfori fcoiild entertain a ’ more proper respect, and even veneration for ancient forms than he did; they were generally founded in ' wifdom, and Well calculated to promote the jends for which they were iristituted. When, however, the powers thus created, were perverted or abufedj when the real efficient purposeS were no longer fought or attainable; he oiuft confefsy his rfcfpeft and veneration - decreased in exact proportion to the extent and magnitude of the evil fu period uced brpermitted; ‘

Parties, for instance, came to that Hohfe, and the other deliberative branch of the legislature, for relief; afifing fronl fonje misfortune, which could in no other manner be palliated or removed. The ground Of their application, unde ? pircumstances similar to the present, was the commission of a criminal aft in one of the parties; too often within the previous knowledge of the party deemed innocent, and not ub -. frequently, lie feared, upon agreement and with pre - concert, In such cases, would any noble Lord who Heard him, rile and gravely - assert, that either party could. be deemed innocent; he was. perfuaded, that not one of their Lord - ? Ships - would venture to go that length. This, in his appreheniion, was derogatory ., if not directly fiibverfive of every principle of technical or substantial justice; of vir -; tue. - and found morals, and of domestic happiriefs.

Such a mofle of proceeding was to the last degree unbe - coming tl ^ e dignity of the British legislature. It was all ipiproper exercise of - yvhat he deemed an improper power,

^, f •; - iboagh

A. t7Sr•

if E B A T ' £ Si

though it had even. been, more wifely exercised. Thn grounds of relief ought to be founded in law, not made to originate with the legislature The. legislature were ' competent - tof ram e a law for the purpose; but farther than that he would never wish the legislature to interfere; or - that their opinions Should operate upon crimes so as to distribute rewards and punishmentSr The power which ought to give relief, Should be a judicial power, created by. law; and exercised agreeably to the ordinary dispensations of justice; where every man injured would come upon equal terms, and where nothing could be given or with - held farther than what the law or laws imbeing had actually and Specifically prescribed. ‘ \ -

He ^ lid not wiSh to impeach the wifdojn of former times; but having turned his attention pretty fully to the subject; whether his judgment was well conceived or not, he trusted. what he had taken the liberty to submit to their Lordships would not be deemed totally impertinent; if however, in the present instance, he should have the misfortune to differ with their Lordships, it would be his duty as well as inclination to abstain in future from prefling his crude, though well - intended ideas on the House.

The learned prelate ' seemed to be _ of opinion, as a divine, that the marriage bonds were difloluble. He heard the learned prelate with great attention, and should feel a proper diffidence, when he dissented from him, on a subjedi of this kind; yet, if the learned prelate meant to maintain it, as a general principle, connected with the present mode of giving that principle effect, as in the case of passing modern divorce bills, he doubted much of the propriety of both the principle and of carrying it - into execution; and that because the proof ofv individual guilt, in numerous instances, created the evil. When he said this, he wish ' ed to be understood, that the intention of separating suggested the means, the act ©f adultery itfelf, which was repugnant to the principle of all found legislation, namely domestic - peace, good morals, and family union.. He would appeal to every noble lord who heard him, whether constituting a criminal act, as the only medium of relief, was ' not the strongeft poflible incentive ' to the commission of it under certain circumstances ? and whe ^ ther it was1 not probable, that in many cases, the profpedt of a final feperation, did not operate as an encouragement to these beginnings, which experience has often proved have gradually led to more serious and criminal consequences. Vol. I, - Y » There

•

: i6£

PARLIAMENTARY. A. 1781.

There might, it is true, be possible cases, in which a judicial power as he had already observed, properly constituted, might be enabled to give relief} such as incurable disagreements, fixed aversion, and many other untoward acci - dents, which sometimes unhappily arise in the married state, hut the law, be would contend, which might create such a tribunal, ought to have specially in view two points; the preservation of found morality, farther firengthened and Confirmed by the sanction of religion.

A very extraordinary species of commentary had gone forth *, upon what had fallen from him, on the present subject, on a farmer day; and ah absurdity in conclusion had been endeavoured to be fixed upon him in consequence thereof. It was represented without doors, ' as if it had been maintained in that House, if a woman had been guilty of a criminal act, and concealed her shame in several. instances, but had at leng ' h been detected, such deletion would be a good ground for the husband to apply for relief; but that when she com mitted a similar act openly and publicly, to the disgrace of her sex, and invited persons to be witnesses to it, that the injured husband ought to be precluded all red refs. This was fa very unfair manner of stating, or rather mifrepresenting his arguments and his words. No such expression fell from him; no such argument ever entered his mind; nor could, of course, what he said. admit of so unjuft and absurd a con - ciufion. It was not because Mrs. Goocfae had acted, openly and avowedly in the shameful manner file had done, and not by chance, inclination, stealth, or from paflion, but because {he acted openly for the purpose of laying a foundation, such as would infure her the attainment of the great object of her wiflies, apd, for aught that appeared satisfactocily to the contrary, that of heF hufhand likewise.

His Lord ship, after several other arguments, all tending to convey his hearty disapprobation of the bill, as well as of granting divorces by an immediate act of the legislature, added, that the event oh the present occasion, be it what it might, he should have the satisfa£lion of having discharged his duty to their Lordflaips,. and the public, ., by setting his face openly against a custom, which he was firmly perfuaded had proved within the fast century fq destru < Stive : to morals and; found ' *. -. religion,

Alluding to some observatxqns matte; on his lordship’s speech os the a ^ t - h, in the newspapers '

i6j

A. 178 - 1.. DEBATES. '

religion, and had in infinitely more instances than appeared either to that House or the public, proved so defiru&ive of the happinefs of married people, their parents, children, friends, and relations.

The Bifhbp of Rochester acknowledged, that if he had en - tertained any doubts upon the subje$ :, the learned Lord on ° 0C - eJer the woolfack had completely removed them, both as to the impropriety of fending the bill to a committee, and therein introducing a new principle, and likewise of the bill itfelf, independentof any collateral consideration. Under this impression, he therefore rofe to declare his intention of - giving the right reverend prelate’s motion a dire < 3t negative.

The bar was then cleared, and the House divided : Con -

tents for committing 10; not contents, 9.

The bill was accordingly committed for that day fortnight, the J2th of Match.

February 27.

Private business. — Adjourned till Monday.

March 5.

Private business. — Adjourned to the next day *

March 6.

Private business. — No debate.

March 7.

Public business, - in ccurfe, — No debate. —Adjourned till I Monday.

S March 12.

I Lord Edgecombe took his oaths and feat in the House,. on, LorJ EJgt - his new dignity ofViscount - Mount - Edgecombe, of Valetort, ® ' ” ^ in the county of Devon. His Lordship was introduced by Black Rod and Garter, between - the Viscounts Hampden and ’ V/entworth. '

Several public and private bills received the royal assent by commission.

The Bishop of St. David ' s then moved the order of the day. The Bishop. for the House to go into a committee on Gopche’s Divorce - St - ®am Bill. The House accordinglyadjourned during - pleasure, and m ^ s Lord Searfdale took HisTeat at the table.

TEs Lord Chancellory zsi soon as. the title of the bill wasThe ^ rd read came to his place, and spoke against the - principle as Cia”"//cr *

Y 2 well

64

P A RL I A M E N TAR Y

A. 1781,

weH as provisions of the bill,. recapitulating the whole of the evidence -, as on the two preceding days, and malting fevera} pointed observations upon it as he proceeded.

JHeTBiftop The Bilhop of St. David1 as on the former day, expa *. ’ tiated much on the very singular hardship Mr. Gooche mu ft labour under should the present bill be thrown out, and in - consequence thereof. To ill - treated, and injured a man be debarred all future redrefs, and compelled to live with an abandoned woman : and as the learned Lord’s arguments seemed to rest chiefly on a prefumed collufiori or pre - concert between the partiesj he thought, in order to clear up ' that point to the satisfaction of their Lordships, it would be very proper to call Mr. Woodcock, Mr. G ° oehe’s agent to be again examined at the bap.

Mr. Woodcock ^ yas accordingly interrogated as to several particulars, and seemed to return very faYisfa&ory answers, lb far as he was acquainted with the transe&ion as an agent, - rr - Being ordered to withdraw, -

I. ord4l > h > g - Lord Abingdon rofe, and spoke in favour of the bill, ftre -

£ea. nuoufly contending, that it did not appear by any part of the evidence that Mr. Gooche acted in pre - concert, or was pre - consentfng to his wife’s infamous condu6t.

A general conversation now arose, which continued for some time, and which contained little more than the mere re capitulation of the former arguments.

At length, the first enacting cla ' ufe for difToIving the marriage of the parties being read, the Lord Chancellor spoke against it, and demanded a division. The committee being counted, there appeared for the claufcj contents 13 : 5 not contents 14.

His Lordship ( hen moved, that the House be resumed, which was agreed to without a division; so that after three days warm debate, the bill was rejected, and reje&ed precife - ] y by an equal majority to that which voted for fending it tq committee on that day fortnight.

Chan -

cellor.

Private business.

March 13. No debate.

- ' ' ., March 14,

Bari oSRad - AsToorias the private business was over, the ' Earl of Radm - t ;, ? r rofe, and moved the focond reading of the bill for ' obliging all ' officers serving in the militia, to deliver in their qualifications, agreeable to the feverala&s of Parliament passed for the ' regu - Jatibn of the militia in that ^ arfof Great Britain called Eng *

' land *

A. 1781. DEBATES.

land ^ to the clerk of the peace in each county, where they respefitively served, with U particular account of the nature of the estate, description, &c. His lordship in support of the bill observed, that the laws already in being had proved defective, arid great numbers of unqualified persons were admitted; by which means, instead of being a constitutional defence, aswas. first intended, by putting arms into the hands of those, who were the natural and fitted; defenders of their own property, numbers of half - pay officers, and others, who had no attachment either by birth or possessionto the provincial regiments, had been appointed to commissions. Hence the militia, as to every purpose, but that of mere defence, differed very little, if at all, from a Handing army. He begged, how -. ever, to be understood, that he had no objeCHon to the mode of.

I appointment farther than as it contradicted the original intention of the first framers of the militia laws, and of every subse - quent law enacted for the fame purpose. He had no ' objection, i for instance, to the employing half - pay officers in the service of their country; but he would have them properly employed ;

I he would have them either attached to the corps to which they [ formerly belonged,.. or incorporated into the new levies. He [ felt equally as to those gentlemen who had never before ? served, but who were not entitled to serve in the militia, un -

I1 der the present existing laws. If they wished to serve their " country, and had friends, they could not fail of obtaining commissions. If they had not, sufficient interest, to obtain fcommissions, nor had money tb purchase, he would appeal to I every noble lord who heard him, if there could be the leaf ! : fliardffiip in compelling them to quit a service from which I they could derive no possible advantage; but, on the contrary, would suffer a material injury, in spending so many years of

Ithe moil valuable part of their lives to, no manner of business, thereby unfitting themselves, as soon as the militia should come to be disbanded, for any profitable or advantageous pursuit. They would - be gentlemen, or idlers, without the ipeans of supporting the character; and, in Ihort, frortf ' being probably useful members of society, they would become a burden to their friends, He did not mean to confine the intended reform fb the lubaltern officers only; he believed that the abuse had in many instances reached higher; and that several captains of companies had not a qualification, which if inquired into would make them eligible, even to be appointed subalterns. On the whole, he trusted jnoble Lords would agree with him, that the original indention of the militia Jaws ought to beffridlly p ' urlued, or, jlbat all restrictions should be removed, and the militia in.

I that

166 PARLIAMENTARY ' A. 1781,

that instance, as well aa in every other, put upon the fame footing with the military.

Earl Gower. Earl Gvvjer rofe, and in a short speech, confirmed the rea - foning of the noble lord who spoke last, he acknowledged that, what had been urged by the noble Earl, carried with it great weight. The principle and spirit of the militia laws Were such exa£lly as his Lordship had described, but he doubted much of the expediency of the noble lord’s bill, at any time pending the war, but at this season, he was per - feftly satisfied, that any material change would prove very injurious to the service. /

It would in the firftinftance prove extremely troublefome to those gentlemen who were really qualified, to deliver in, proofs and specifications in the manner proposed by the bill .; Great numbers of the officers were quartered in the most; i distant parts of the kingdom, from the the places of their re - lidence, and where of course their property was situated. Many obstacles might arise to impede, or render at the best. disagreeable, such a specification of property to those nearer home, or even on the spot. But his prime objection was, upon another more general ground, the advanced period of the lession compared with the time, poffibly the militia might be. called upon to go into camp or into garrison. If the law was to be strictly enforced, there was no doubt but numberlefs. reiignations would follow; yet that was not all, those commillions mull be filled up and other persons appointed in their room. Here then were several difficulties to be surmounted. One was, that dilmiffing persons already trained to the service, and substituting otliers in their room who had every thing to learn; this it was true, might be construed into a disapprobation of the principle of the bill, but he did not mean to go farther than saying, that the present feafOn, not very far distant from the eve of a campaign, was a very improper time for so general and extensive an alteration ^ He i was not then prepared to finally decide whether or not such an alteration ought ever take place in a time of war, but he - was fully prepared to lay, that it ought not to take place ini. the middle of the month of March, when we could not tell ! ' how soon we might be attacked by pur numerous and very formidable foes. ■. “ •

The other point, when connected with the foregoing, was a matter, in his appreheofion, of very ferio. us confederation,. He trusted, that it was already sufficiently understood, that though the places of those officers who could not prove their

qualifications !,

a. 178iv DEBASES.

qualifications. Or would not perhaps give themselves tlx ? trouble, would not be so well filled as at preflent, and that for - the reason already assigned, that such as had seen service were preferable to such as had not. But suppofing this to make no material difference, nor to be productive of any inconvenience; he wished to prefs the difficulty on their Lordship’s minds, which would result from filling up those vacancies, and the description of men who would be called upon to fill them up; men of small property and of industrious habits,

many of them with large families, who drew their chief support from the induftry of the persons who would be thus called upon. He should say nothing of the increased expenc ' e of living, and of a subaltern officer being obliged to maintain himself in one part of the - kingdom, and his wife and a numerous family of childen, perhaps at two or three hundred miles distance, in another part of the kingdom; and it might be attended with a farther evil, and he believed often would, if the person thus described should be in any business, the carrying on of which would require his own perforial care and attention; for instance, if engaged in any manufacturing or mercantile business, or a gentleman farmer, &c. the distress and injury in such a case was easier imagined than described, it was therefore well worthy of their Lordship ^ s attention, whether it would not be better to prefer an an ideal evil to actual injury and inconvenience. «

i He begged however, before he fat down, to be under flood; as by no means ' wishing to put a perpetual negative upon such a bill, means might be devised to remove every one of the inconveniencies which he had taken the liberty to point out; “

! wheneyer such means were proposed, he should chearfully pter into a consideration of them. Some things had {truck ' aim on the subject, which he flattered himself, when pro -

! « riy digested might accelerate the object the noble Earl rad in contemplation. But as - matters then flood, and under be manifefl difficulties and striking inconveniencies which lad suggested. themselves to him, it was impossible for him *

Jt so critical a moment as - the present, to give his assent to iny measure which would : work so great an alteration in the — nilitia force of this kingdom.

The Diake of Jidanchester laid, he perfectly agreed With the ' Duke loble Earl, who brought in the bill, that the appointing \xn - Manc [ ualified persons to commissions in the militia, was no lefs Igainfi the letter than direClly repugnant to the spirit of the ' nilitia laws or system, of having atr internal fbree ^ or the de - i fence I

I

, - f ARtlAMENTftRY A. i ? 8h

fence of the kingdom, which force was to be placed under the command, direction, and controul of the actual owners of the foil.. Hejamented the defeat in the laws already in being, which declared, or rather described, the : prop er pe - ( ions who were in their respective ranks to ( hare - that command} but so it was, that the law wanted sufficient sanctions to give it effectual operation.

He thought it his duty to say lb much, and the more so as he had at a very early period of his life paid particular attention to the militia; his lituation, as Lord Lieutenant of a county, rendered it an aft : of duty, he might add it became with him an aft of pleasure as welf ^ as duty; but he must add, he was fully satisfied, that every thing advanced by the noble Earl in the blue ' ribbon, who spoke last, convinced him more and more, of not only the impropriety or inexpediency of infilling upon qualifications, but the actual impracticability of Supplying the places of those officers who would, if the noble Earfs bill were to pass, be dismissed from the service. He did not mean to say, that such a thing ' was a ^ olutely im - possible, because there was a law in being for the purpose, and it might be well supposed that the legislature would not, nor had not enacted an impoffibility -; but he would say ^ that it was impossible in his conception, to enforce the law rigidly, in the manner and to the extent proposed by the noble Earl, without creating ^ so many difficulties and obstructions as mull prove highly detrimental to the militia service in general.

He would at act, time hereafter, moll readily co - operate all in his power with the noble lord towards effecting so delir - v able an end as his Lordship profeffed to have in view; but for

the reasons urged by the noble Earl in the blue ribbon, and the many obllacles which he foresaw would be thrown in the Way, even of carrying the present intended law into execution, as well as those already in being, not choosing to give the bill a direct negative, he wished that it might be either withdrawn, poftponed to some dillant day, or disposed of by the previous ! question. 1

Earl of Co - The Earl of Coventry expressed himself nearly to the fame ! vcntry. purport of the two noble lords who Ipoke before him, and ex - prelfed a wish that the second reading of the bill be deferred !

, till that day three months. 1 Lord The Lord Chancellor put the question, that the iaid bill be

Chancellor, read a second time on that day three months 5 which was agreed to without a division *

The

A. 1781. ' P E B A T E S. 16 %

The Earl of Radnor role a second time, and moved an ad - ^ 3 ’ ' 1 of dref’s to his Majesty, deiiring that his Majesty would be grv Radnor\ ciously - pleased to give directions, that there be laid before that Hotife a return of all the qualifications sent in to the respective clerks of the peace, &c. by officers ierving in his Majesty’s militia forces. / '

The Lord Chancellor came from the woolfack to his place, Lord Chan - and oppofedvthe motion; said it would give a great deal qfce ^ or unnecessary trouble, and would besides create an alarm throughout the whole militia of the kingdom. By the disposal of the bill on which he had just put the question, it appeared to be the sense of the House, that no farther proceeding was to be had concerning it during the remainder of the present session, consequently the noble lord’s motion could answer no purpose. If at any future period, - noble lords ihouId turn the affair in their minds, and coming properly - prepared to enter into a full discussion of the subject, and ready to devise means, which - while directed to the particular object, w < 4 > ld at the fame time provide for the inconveniences pointed out by every individual lord who spoke, but the noble Earl who made the motion, it would be time enough to move for the lift; but to give trouble without - any direct intimation that fuchmeans had been discovered, or were meant to be resorted to, in his apprehension, would be no lefs nugatory than improper. Such being his idafis, he found himself indispensably bound, as an act of duty, to oppofe the noble lord’s motion.

The. question Was then put, and the ^ motion negatived without a division.

Adjourned to Monday.

Jbfarch 19.

. prayers - being over. Lord Middletown was introduced in the ufu. al form, and took the oaths and his feat in that House, on Lis recent accession to that title. -. The Earl of Rofebpry and Lord Say and Seje - likcwife took the oaths. and tlreir feats. ;

As soon as the private business was finjshed Earl Ferrers role, EavIR ’ /rcn and made fevera ! observations on the present, alarming increase. of Roman CathpHcs in this kingdom, which he endeavoured to prove, from the comparilon of three. different computations made at three different. peripds.. In 1717, hefai. d the number ofRoman Catholics in the county of Chester, upon a fair calculation, was 10, 000 : in 1767, upon a iimilar estimate, they. Vol. I. ' Z had

i79

PARLIAMENTARY - A. 1781.

had arisen to 25, 000; and according to the late computation made at the interpolation of Parliament, they amounted to upwards of 27, 000. His Lordship thought it fair to argue from this particular distriCl to the generality of the kingdom, and therefore concluded that the number of Roman Catholics upon the whole nmft have been increased more than double within the period mentioned. He considered this as so dangerous to the religious establishment and domestic security of this country, that, with their Lordships perm ' iffion, he would bring in a bill for flopping the increase of this growing evil, and particularly : impoling fame severe penalties upon any attempts on the part of P - apifts to make converts to their faith; and likewise to make a ilriCt prohibition against their teaching in schools of any denomination. If the sense of the House should be with him, he meant to move that their Lordships be funmioned for Wednesday ievennight, for the purpose of resolving itfelf into a committee, tp consider of certain propolilions calculated to rpflrain the farther growth of Popery within this kingdom.

He trailed, that their Lordships would give him the credit he deserved, when he allured them, that ' his motives were ivot founded in a false zeal or intolerant spirit; an inclination to opprefs orperfecute. So far from it, that he was clearly of opinion, that many of the laws now in being were both cruel and impolitic, so, much so, that such had beeb the moderate and lenient disposition and conduCl of government that the whole code was become a dead letter. It was in order to strike out a middle path that he prefumed to give their Lordships the intended trouble, for the purpose of reviling those laws, or rather, repealing all the penal statutes now in being against Popery, and passing a general law in their Read, which should have. two special objeCls in view; the protection of the people, professing the Romifh religion, in the free exercise of it, and oiF their civil liberties, and property; the other, by providing speh wholesome reHric - tions as might promife to prevent the farther increasing the growth of Popery. He would wilh to have such a law as would be effective, as would not clalh with the eltab, lifted rules of humanity and justice; and yet such as would defeat every attempt to propagate a religion, which from its principles, tenets, &c. ‘ held out llrong temptations to the weak, rhe credulous, and the ignorant. He would wilh to fee lels rigour and more efficacy introduced into the laws for preventing the growth of Popery; for although he was not very

easily

A. 1781; DEBATES. 171

easily led to be alarmed by bugbears, he could easily foresee by the documents on the table, and to which he had referred ^ when he first rofc, that an evil, trifling and comparatively small in its first appearance might increase, and gain strength sufficient. to produce consequences of a very serious nature in its progrefsi

Should none of their Lordships oppofe his intentions, he meant as soon as he could ^ learri the sense of the House oil the subject, to move that their Lordships be summoned, on Wednesday the 29th instant, to take into consideration the propriety of repealing all the penal statutes against Roman Catholics, for the purposes already mentioned ;

The Bishop of Chester, said he had no intention to oppofcThe Bp. of the noble lord’s design of introducing a bill for checking the growth of Roman Catholics; but as the county of Chester had been particularly alluded to, he thought himself under some neceffity to explain to their Lordships the true source of the increase mentioned. He had made calculations as well as the noble lord, and acknowledged that, as. to the general re - fult, his accounts very nearly corresponded with those which had just been stated; but though he had every reason to depend upon that calculation which was made in the year 1767 ^ and also on that subsequently formed in 1780, yet he had various motives for disputing the accuracy or authenticity of the first estimation made in 1717, which he believed to be very vague and uncertain. If there was no other argument than this, against the conclusion which had been drawn, that the number was increased more than double, yet that would be of considerable validity, as it would shew the House, that though this conclusion was not neceflarity false, yet it was probably not true, and being upon the whole by no means to be confided in, nothing could be fairly inferred from it.

The circumstance, however, to which he principally referred was this, and a very simple though cogent one it was, the immenfe increase of population which had lately taken place within the diocese of Chester. This increase ^ since the year 1717, was such as exceeded all belief, and of itfelf constituted, a sufficient explanation of the alarming proposition stated by the noble lord If the number of the inhabitants in general had been so considerably increased, it was plain the Roman Catholics must have increased in a proportionate degree, consequently, any arguments built upbn a partial increase of the Roman Catholics within the diocese of Chester, unless accompanied with stating in general the progrefs of

Z 2 popn -

172

■ £arl Fernrit

, PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

population, in aft be founded in error. As tobringmgin a bill for preventing the conversion of persons to the Roman Popish perfuafion, that, in his opinion, was unnecessary, as the fe - vereft penalties were already denounced by the law of the land against any man who should make such an attempt, it being even a capital offenfe in a father to conspire with a Popifh prieft in producing such a conversion. With respect to the schools, he was of opinion the penalties and impediments to them were lufiiciently severe. No Roman Catholic was permitted. to teach a Protestant child; as for their teaching the children that belonged to their own faith. He should never concur in depriving them of that, as he considered it to be totally inconsistent with justice, humanity, and perhaps policy, to impofe such a restriction. Upon the whole, however, he had no objection to the bill being brought in at the time proposed by the noble lord, but he would just : take. the liberty to suggest, that at this period, when the religious ferment which had been recently excited in the kingdom was hardly quieted, it might not perhaps be quite politic to revive the subje£l. '

He vyished, the noble lord however, before he ventured to commit himself upon the subje£t to perfectly inform himself, leaft : it should be found, that the very argument which he stated might make against : his conclusion; for if after numbering the Protestant inhabitants, as ' well as the Roman Catholics, it should be found, that the increase of the latter was not proportionably rapid with the former, it would amount to a demonstration, that the present penal statutes, though become a dead letter from the lenient temper of government, had effected the only purpose for which such laws could be pafted, the preventing the growth of Popery. He wished likewise, - before he fat down, to ' remind the noble Earl, that although he was far. from wishing or desiring to fee those laws rigoroufly ex - ecuted, because repugnant to the first : principles of humanity, and the tolerant l ' pirit of the Protestant church established in this kingdom, he was not prepared to say that he would assent to a total and indifcri -. minate repeal of them; for if penal statutes could be defended upon any ground, it must be that of preventing greater evils, and so far he believed if from no other motives, the evils they were intended to prevent had been in a great measure entirely removed.

Earl Ferrers said, he was as averse to making experiments, or wishing toperfecute as the Right Rev. Prelate '; he thought .; - he

a; 1781. D/E B A T i E : S ^ T 373

lie had fully explained himself upon that subject when he first rofe, and as to making experiments, he was ! not so self - sufficient as to take such a fafk. upon himself, unaidedior unaffixed, by others; he rofe only to throw out a proportion to the House for its opinion, particularly that of the - Right Rev.

Bench, whose advice and assistance, upon a subject of so much importance, he made no doubt he should be able to obtain.

By what had now fallen from the learned prelate, he was given to understand what the temper of that Bench was; and on that ground only, more than from any perfmfion or conviction brought home to his mind by what had fallen from the learned Prelate, he was willing to acquiesce in his Lordship’s sentiments; besides this, there were other reasons which operated upon and induced him to determine to change his intention of troubling their Lordship’s on the day mentioned *

It was a subject well worthy of their Lordship’s attention, and though he should not taWany step in it during the course of the present session, he heard no obje£tion started against such a law as he had ventured to suggest, sufficient ta prevent him from taking the affair up at some more fit and convenient opportunity.

The House adjourned to the next day.

March 20.

This day the loan and lottery bill was read a second time, and ordered for a third reading the next day. —Adjourned.

March 21.

As soon as prayers were over, the order of the day for the third reading of the loan bill was moved; which, as fbon as - the I title was announced, called up

I The Marquis of Rockingham; his Lordship laid, he was Marquis of totally uninformed, whether the bill was or. was not before Rs ^ gfam *

| their Lordships till the evening before laftj which was the [ day it was brought up from the other House, presented and jreadafirft time. Yefterday he. attended in his place, in or - [ der to deliver his sentiments on - it, upon the second reading jbut the House was so badly attended, that he didjiot think. It [ proper to ( peak to empty benches ^ and therefore poftponed jwhat he had to say to this day upon. the biii ! s going - to a jcommittee; but here again. he found himself disappointed, jfor he underflood lince he came into the House,. that the bill piad not bqeni committed, but that every necessary form had jbeen dispensed with, and, the bill ordered to be read a third

174

PARLIAMENTARY Aj 17815

time this day, contrary to all precedent, ufage, : and rule of parliamentary proceeding respecting public.. bills, which fhotild be publicly committed in the body of the House.

But he did not mean to rest his opposition at all upon the matter of form his objections would be directed against the substance of the bill, the manner in which it was. framed ^ the corrupt source from which it originated, and the various mischiefs and evils with which it was pregnant,. whether con - ftdered in a retrospective or prospective view, or as fraught with present mischief. The loan to which their Lordship’s were going tp give a fanCtion, by passing the present bill, was one of the most corrupt in its formation, the mod shame - ful in its progrefs, and as far as the conlequences could be supposed to extend, the most injurious to the public that could poflibly be conceived.

After this introduction, which he pronounced with much warmth, and with uncommon energy of voice; his Lordship observed, that the loan presented two faces, the oftenfible or open one, and the concealed; the former being framed so as to impofe upon the public within and without doors, and the latter to pillage them of their property; the one was the pretended bargain made by the Minister with the subscribers, in behalf or under the implied faith of Parliament; the other, a private contraCt, made with certain favourite subscribers for the most unjuft, because the most fhamefuliy corrupt, purposes. To prove what he now asserted, he would ftatethe terms of both loans, or rather the real and pretended terms of the fame loan, taken in two different points of view, in order that their Lordships might be enabled to judge how far he was, or was not justified in the very harsh terms he had been obliged to bestow on it, when expressing his disapprobation, he might indeed add his detestation, of the whole transaCtion,

The Mi ^ ifters - terms, as laid before Parliament, were as follow ;

£ £ s. d

150/. 3 per cent, valued at 58 percent. 87 O 0

25/. 4 per cent. - — 7 ° - 7 10 0

Lottery Tickets, four to each iooool. or 12I. upon every 13 1 40

iooool. flock subscription, com -

puted at J

jCJo£I4 0

Her

jL 1781. DEB ATE S.

Here then was the bonus or profit stated by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, in the face of the ' nation, of five pounds fourteen shillings; on the other hand, he begged their Lord - {hips to attend to the teal, not to this fallacious statement, in which he wpuld prove beyond ‘question, that allowing the value of the stocks to have been fairly valued, the bonus was upwards of eight and a quarter, if riot full eight and a half per cent, instead of five ana three quarters, as had been Hated by the noble lord, the Minister, in the other House, For to the foregoing were to be added the interest from the first of February to the day of the payment, a period of ( even weeks, at three and four per cent, which on each hundred pounds subscribed, amounted to one hundred and seventy five pounds flock, or about five pounds seven shillings per annum, which within the period alluded to, would on that account alone put into the p. cket of the subscriber nearly eight shillings. There was a discount upon each prompt allowed, and finally all those subscribers who should make the idft payment, on or before the middle of September, were to be paad interest throughout, from the first of January. Taking therefore the bonus as stated by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and adding the other advantages he had novv mentioned, lup - pressing all fractions of a shilling, the real bonus would stand as hereunder :

150/. 3 percent. - - - 87 o

25/. 4 per cent. 17 10

Lottery Tickets, — - - - - ——— 1 4

Interest ^ accruing from the ift of January till the

day of the first payment - - - 7 o

Ditto from the 1 ft payment till September, making all reasonable allowances and deductions 2. 6

Total 108 7

[ If any noble lord, who heard him, could set him right, or point out any error he had committed in the foregoing statement, he should be much obliged to him to rife; for unless he should find that he had been misinformed in his computations, he would take it for granted, that the whole had been faithfully and corre£lly stated.,

Before he should proceed any farther, he thought. it necessary to take notice of some particulars, which aggravated the conduct of the minister, because calculated to serve the

sub -

? 75

176

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781,

subscribers at the expence of the nation. By CaftaignYPa - : per, the Friday before the 9th, the budget was opened the 3 per cent, bore 58 and 59, and the per cent, were done at 70.. In the mean time a rumour of a peace was spread,; which between that and Monday, t ^ ie day the bargain was supposed to have been struck, rofe the 3 per cent, to 60, 61, and even 62, and the per cent, to 72. Yet, though the noble lord himself acknowledged that there was forae foundation for such a rumour, and even in his place ventured to say, that there was a profpeft, or at leall an appearance of a tendency to peace, instead of availing himself of that favourable opportunity, of making an advantageous bargain for the public, he rated the per cent, at 70, and the 3 per cent, at 58, just as if no alteration in the state of affairs had happened, or that the flocks had not been at all operated upon by the rumour or profpe£l alluded to There was another circumstance which deprived the noble lord of all apology, because in flaring the progrefs of the bargaip with the subscribers, he confessed, he had not intirely concluded it till Monday after, as his Lordfh. ip, expressed himself, there had appeared to him a disposition in the belligerant powers tending to peace.

Such being the circumstances attending, the loan, he thought himself fully justified,, in asserting, that, on the day the loan was submitted to Parliament, the bonus stated by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, of fi ve pounds fourteen shillings the two pounds thirteen shillings arising from the prompts, discounts, and previous commencement of the interest from the first of January to the day of the first payment, with the depreciated value of the flock, added together, brought the bonus or profit up to the monftrous sum of nearly ten per cent, or one million two hundred thousand pounds premium; at leaft whether it might prove so lucrative to the subscribers, the nation would be obliged to pay that sum, for the loan of twelve millions, and besides an ulurious interest of five and an half per cent, in perpetuity. He was. awa ' re ’ dfthe answers “ which might be made in defence of the loan,; one was, the market fixed the price, and that the neceffity - of the state. made the : bargain, and not the minister; that ' to be lure the bargain was a, bad one, in one light,; but a good one, whea considered as the best that could be made in the - present : exi - gency. of affairs. He was ready to admit ' both as general I propositions, which could not be fairly called in question, or - •controverted; but that - was the very ' point; iji - issue between ® - those

A. i > 8t. DEBATES.

those who hegociated the loan arid defended it, arid those who considered it, at the best, an improvident bargain, and most probably a corrupt one. Hejdenied, that there vv. ^ s. a nefcef - iity of dealing with One set of men in preference to another, in order to enrich them at the expence of the public, or by plundering the public still more, to value the flocks one and an half, if not two per cent, under their intrinfic value. This formed the state of things, which he could never approve of, and a species of Hate neceffity of which he would ' ever diipute the existence. He did not doubt, however, but the measure originated in neceflity; lie meant ministerial necessity; ror notwithstanding the numerous places, penftons, contrails, and every other species of influence, in the gift or disposal of the minister; notwithstanding the last effect of a weak and unpopular administration, he meant the lavifii hand with which honours were conferred, upon all sizes and clefcri ' ption of persons, such was the folly, the madnefs, he might add the wickednefs of the measures of government, that the - minister found himself compelled to resort to this ftiarrieful wafte of public money, to bring to his Hand arc ! the corruptible part of his opponents, and to lix and periuade the wavering and doubtful among his friends.

What he had yet offered on the subje£l of the loan would he totally incomplete .; if he did not point out some of the leading - circumstances respefling its negociation and distribu - tion; which he trusted, ' would serve to convince the greatest political sceptic that it was not only improvident, but highly corrupt.

He should for this purpose recur to the only ground on which it was attempted to be defended in the other House, upon the suppofttion already mentioned, shat although a very difad vantageous bargain, it was the bfeft that could be made. He would unfay every lyllabie he had urged to the contrary, if that was the case, and would now proceed to offer his reasons to shew it was not.

The amount of the offers made by those who wished to fub - subscribe, he understood amounted to ' between 30 and 40 millions, who, in the language of the treasury, were deemed good; men, or persons suppoled to be able to perform their engage - 1 ments, incafe thatany untoward accident should happen, ' which ' might depreciate the flock .; This fufely was a good ground for the minister to go to market on. He wanted to borrow a sum of money upon interest, and was willing besides - to give a premium to the lender. If, as in the case of aa individual. Von. I, A a who

•. ST

8‘ PARLIAMENTARY A. i ) 3i, :

who wants to borrow a thousand pounds, and mult have it, that is, cannot at all do without it, and there is but one lender,. there the necelEty is evident; for he submits because he cannot help it, and lies at the mercy of the money lender -; but on the other hand, if when it is known, that liis security is. ' good, and that he has two or more persons. ready to advance the '. Turn wanted, his agent, if he be able or honest, \vdll endeavour to make the belt bargain in his power; he will treat with the money lenders severally, and ' close with the man who will advance the money at the lowefl terms.

Was that the conduct of the miniller in the other House ? did he propofe terms to different persons ? No such thing; He fele&cd from among the subscribe ' rs a few men of great weight, and those he meant to serve, and give a preference to; and after going through all the idle forms of a mock negotiation, agreed to the terms they prescribed to him, or he wished to prescribe to himself.

But this is all assertion, it may be said. What proof is there that eve. ry means were not tried to make a good har - - gain for the public ? Proof, he would affirm little Ibort of mathematical demonstration.. For no specific bargain was made with any man. The mini Her came to Parliament, noton an actual contraf ! with any particular man or description of men; he cam ? only upon. the faith of several offers amounting to upwards of 30 millions to be subscribed ., What next ? Why, when the persons who offered to subscribe, came to have the real sums entered jaefore their names, it was dilco - vered that four - fifths of the subscription was divided among the mini fret’s friends, and a fe\y great monied men; among, in particular, ' ‘feveral of the members of the other House, clerks, mean and obscure persons, &c, while, on the other hand, some of the bell names in the city were either excluded, from the advantages accruing from so profitable a subscription, or did hot get more than a third, a fourth, - or fifth, of what they wrote for. He could not finish what he had to offer on this part of his subject, without hating the following case; either the miniller fore fa w the bargain would prove a very advantageous bargain to the subscribers, or that it was a precarious one, iiable to great rifejue. If tho former, he should have reduced the profit; if the latter ' it was rather some what singular, that he should put those, W ' hom he wished to serve, in a lituation which might poffibly render sn. intended aft ©f friendship a misfortune.

A, 1781. DEB A T E

' It was a matter of opinion no way material to his argument, whether - members of the other House in, trade ought to have had any ’ part of the iubscription; but if notin trade, or dealers in money, he, believed it would be very difficult to perfuade any man in his senses, that ten per cent, profit, upon J a loan would not anfwet every purpose of influencing their condu£t as much as if it had been actually ilTu ' ed from the Treasury, consequently, the great numbers whose names appeared in the lift, laid before the other tloufe, and the : much greater number whose names were concealed or co - - ’ : vered; convinced him ' that the loan was negotiated > and fi - - nally made with a view to bribe those who would not perhaps look for or receive a bribe in a direct ma - nnen *

He knew - it was not parliamentary to spekkdf whatpafred in the other House; he would therefore say, that he heard theloan defended in a certain aifembly on two grounds, betides those he had already recounted. One was, that if any benefit was likely to ariie from a subscription of the kind, it was natural and proper that the minister should give a preference to his friends ’; and that loans had been generally understood, in former times, to be an engine of influence, and an appendage of administration, in order to enable them to conduct the affairs of government. To each of these he would give a specific answer -, by demonstrating, that the fact having not happened, in reference to the period alluded to, it did not warrant the conclusion; and if it had happened, that its specific application in the present instance couM mot be mantained. '

He had been of an age sufficient to turn his attention to public affairs during the lair glorious war, and the glorious confe - quences which attended it; and could therefore vouch for the truth of what ' he was going to assert, during the administration of Lord Chatham, when the Duke of Newcastle; presided at the head of the treasury. He; had since refreshed; his mind, by turning over such papers as enabled him to ' state eorre&ly the fa£ls he was about to mention.

The bonus or profits orythe omnium of the loan of 1758$ - was but one and a quarter per cent, on two millions; ia j 1759, he believed at half per cent, discount upon four millions. In 1760 one and an half upon eight millions; and the last three - quarters per cent, though twelve millions were raised. The next year the Duke of Newcastle went out of office, and it was not till x7 ^ 3 » the first year of Lord Bute’s administration, that the minister,. for the time being, ever. ■ - “ A. a 2, thought

PARLIAMENT A; R Y ' A, 17 - 81 ;

thought of extending lais influence, by plundering the nation in the midft of those distrefles which are always the concomitants of a flare of war, during an administration in which a secret over - ruling influence was introduced, the fatal cogfe - quences of which, he feared, would only cease or terminate with the overthrow of our constitution, if not tire total de - firuftion of the nation itfelf.

So far, he trusted the sass was disproyed, which was a full answer to the inference drawn from it but he begged leave to add, that. the glorious and fortunate, spirijted and wife administration which. h© had - been speaking of, he meajfi when Lord Chatham was a. t the head of our councils, a bJe. WPaft. Ie. at the head of our finances, and an Anfon at the head, of our. navy, wanted no aid or support from corrupt or fee ret in - fluence, - —influence from bribery on Qne hand, or secret intrigue ^ on the other. The influence of that, day arqfe from another fiuuree, from a well founded confidence in the \vij -, dom of their measures, in a well - earned popularity; in theij ? spirited and vigorous plans, jmost happily and : fuc. ce/sfully, executed; in an able and faithful disbursement of the public money committed to their care and management, and qu the whole refted on the only true basis on which national profperity or fiuccefs can ever safely be fnpported,. a firm and fixed attachment to the constitution, and every blessing and fecu. rity we. enjoy under it.

Haying, touched upon a great variety of other topics of lefs con/e ^ uenee, he contended, that the minifier i. u the other House had broke his faith with Parliament and the nation; and though he should not put a negative on. the bill, he deemed him/elf called upon, as an, aft of duty, % Q teft. ify his ' total dilapprc ^ ation. of a loan ., which at a time of finch public calamity as the present, when the utmost ceconomy became neee. ssary, wantonly and corruptly fiav - ished. a. t leafifc a million fieriing; and that, in his apprehension, merely for the purpose of influencing or bribing the reprefientativ. es of the nation, in Parliament, to give their countenance. and; support to the continuance of a mo. ft wicked, impolitic, and ruinous war.

No reply was made.. The ministers present looked at each, other but, nothing more, passed. ..

Lords - P r o t e s t March 21.

The order of the day being read for the third reading of the bill, entitled Ct An aft for railing a certain furn. of money by way of annuities, and a lottery; and for cpnfol ' idating. 1 - certain

A, i7$i. EL E BAT dE - S. -

certain annuities which were made one joint ftqck, by an aft made in the ftcond year of the reign of his present Majesty ' with pertain annuities confplidated by several acts tn. adp in the twenty - fifth and twenty - sixth years of the reign of King George II. and in tjbe fifth year of tie reign of his present idajesty, ’ *

Moved, ec that the said - bill; be now read a third time. ’ Which being objected to, after debate the question was put thereupon; and it was refoived in the affirmative *

The said bill was then accordingly read. a third time The, question was put that the said bill do how pafsj it was refoived in the affirmative. '

Piflqntient,.

il Because when a bargain improvident in its terms, corrupt in its operation, and partial in its distributions, is ne - jgociated by; a minister acting for the public, its having passed through the rHouse of Commons can be no reason for it ? passing without observation through the House of Lords Without waving - our undoubted right of giving a negative to this or any other bill, we respect the principle of public credit too much to attempt at this junfture to exercise that right, though if we - looked only at the enormity of the abu. le,, the most direct opposition never could be. more properly called for.

“ Twenty - one millions are added to the capital of, the debt for a loan of twelve; five and an half per cent, perpetual annuity is granted ^. - fix hundred and fifty thousand pounds are to be levied in the yearly taxes upon the people. In such a situation the most; rigid oeconomy ought to have been used, and the premium on the loan ought to have been reduced in proportion to the exorbitance of the interest to be paid. Se - reral circumstances appeared favourable to the minister, if his object had been to serve his own support. Befides the profpeft derived from the beginning of a negociation for peace, it is allowed that treble ' the Cum subscribed had been Jjffejed, and a. very large part of that surplus by persons more responfable than very niany of those who were admitted. In _ hat fituatiop, ft ) favourable to the borrower, where the being permitted to lend was fought with emulation, the first; ommissioners of the Treasury ebole to - make a bargain, opened ten per cent -, premium tfteday after the loan.

• ' ' "• ' ’ ' TJiis ‘

Duke of Biibtr. iT, dm

P A RL 1 ' AM E‘N T A R Y A, 1781. ’,

c ’ - This price was not the effect of; mere popular opinion, or of artful management, but was grounded on the real value of the great body of the other flocks at - the ^ time, and was no more than what arose from a just relation to the rest. We are the more. diiTatisfied with this fbameful - prodigality of public money, by comparing it with the period when a. ftri£t. and conscientious. management of the public treafure at home became a foundation for the glory of our anris abroad. During, the Duke of NewcastleV administratiqn, on the fe -. veral successive loans from the year 1758 jnclufiye, vto the time of his removal from office, never. exceeded one and an Half per cent, at the opening; was generally lejfs, and Tome - rimes at discount. Yet the national credi ' t was in vigour. During that time forty - three millions were borrowed. In those happy days, the ministers standing on national ground, were notin a state of servitude to any let of men, nor led, through a false system of politics; to aggravate the distrefles : of their country, by hiring a venal cry to : pedonate the voice of the public, and to give support to the measures which had occasioned such distresses..,

“ It is not a matter of surprise to ns, - at a time when such things can be done - with impunity, that lords of the greatest honour and ability have wholly discontinued their attendance. But it is not improper that those lords who do fom ' etimes attend, should record their names in testimony of - their strong condemnation of the terms of this loan, and of : the motives which they conceive, dictated terms lo very disadvantageous to the Crown and the nation.

Rockingham.

: Portland, Osborne,

J. Sf. Asaph,

De Ferrars, Fitzwilliams, Bolton, Ponsonby. ”

Jlfarch 22.

: This day his Majesty came to the Koufe, and gave the royal assent to the loan, lottery, militia, and several other public - and private bills; after which the House adjourned to Monday.

' jMarch 26.

Prayers being over, - and the private business fimshed, ‘the Duke of Richmond rofe,. and said, he understood that there

was

A '. 1781. D E B. A "T. E J3. \

\

was a bill before the House for ^ impowering the Colonels of the several militia regiments to enter into agreements with the substitutes, previous to the time of the expiration of the three years. This he laid,; might prove of very great injury to the militia service in - general, indeed it struck him so forcibly, that as soon as he heard it he had polled uj/to town, underflancling it was to be read a third time that day. He meant to move a claule on the third reading, and hoped that the House would so far indulge him as to pollponc the order for the third reading till to - morrow; which was agreed to.

The order was accordingly discharged, and the House adjourned to the next day ., '

Jlfarch 27.

. Private business being over, the Bishop of Chester adclrefled Bi/hop the House in a speech of considerable length. His motive for Chcjitr. riling now to trouble their Lordship’s was, in consequerice of what had fallen from a noble Earl [ Ferrers ] on a former day, relative to the rapid increase of Roman Catholics within this ' kingdom in a few years. The noble Earl’s speech on that oc - calion, had gone forth into the world, and might create an alarm, which he was enabled to affirm, and that with confidence,. would prove every way unfounded. Since he had the honour of addressing their Lordships the lafi : time on the subjedf, he made it his business to inquire more minutely into the fasts, and was well pleased to find all his former arguments, much firengthened, and in a manner confirmed, upon a full and comprehensive investigation of the particular and total numbers.

• He then read several computations of the rapid increase of buildings and inhabitants within certain parts and distridls of his diocese within certain periods, beginning early in this century, and so up to the lateft accounts. or returns he was able to procure, or which had appeared in printed books. In some places the proportion was a fourth, in Others a third, an half; and in others again the numbers had increased four, five, fix fold, or more, but he mentioned two in particular, which, proved beyond question the rapid progrefs population has made in parts of the county of Lancaster. One was of Liverpool, which in the year 1700 contained but five thou - fancl inhabitants, and in 1770 contained thirty - five thousand and a considerable fraction; the other, a quarter of the tovvn. of Manchester, called Saltport, which contained only a few 1 hundreds

fH PARLIAMENTARY A. lyfi,

hundreds in the year 1719, and by the last return was found to contain - eleven thousand fouls.

After mentioning a great many particulars of a ilmilar nature, he informed their Lordships, that he had exerted himself, as far as lay in his power to collect the most accurate accounts, feme from printed books, others from the clergy within his own diocese; and had been tolerably, fticcefsfulia his inquiries relative to that part of it, called the Archdea - conry, where he found the inhabitants had within half a century increased forty thousand; and from such other parti of his diocese whence he had received returns, which did not include the whole, the remainder amounted to fifteen thou - fiand : as far therefore as his inquiries had reached,. he was able to speak with precifion, that within the period he had described, the inhabitants were increased fifty - five thousand, and when the remainder of the returns - Came in, he doubted not but they would be found to be much more.

It had been said by the noble Earl, that the Roman Catholics increased within the diocese of Chester two thousand, between the years 1767 and 1780. If however it was recollected, that it arose from a general increased population during that period within that diocese, it would maintain the very contrary conclusion the noble lord wished to draw from it, for it would prove, that though they had increased, they had not increased in proportion to that of the Protestant inhabitants; besides, notwithstanding the Roman Catholics had increased in the diocese of Chester, he had it from such authority as he could safely depend on, that within the period mentioned by the noble lord, the increase of Roman Catholics throughout England was no more than fifteen hundred; in that point of view likewise, there was an actual decrease of the people of that perfuafion throughout England, the diocese of Chester excepted, and there it had been fully proved that they bore no manner of proportion to the general increased population.

EarlFarnru Earl Ferrers said, he had taken his information from the papers laid on the table, and consequently if he had mil - dated any thing the error was not imputable to him ;, but to the species of information laid before the House -. He said, he Was extremely glad to hear many things which had fallen from the learned prelate; and he was perfectly satisfied of the truth of what the learned prelate had advanced, being now fully convinced, that the apprehensions for. the - increasing growth of Popery, which he had expressed on a former day,

were

A. 1781. DEBATES.. 85

were in a great measure groundlefs, or so far unfounded; as to render such a measure as that he wifiled to submit to the vvifdom of the legislature unnecessary for the pre - ient.

The order of the day ' was then moved, for reading a second time the bill to enable justices of the peace to act in cases of riots and tumults, without taking out their dedimusp ' otejlatum; an original writ ifluable out of the Crown fide of the Court of Chancery, the title of which imports a delegation of power from. His Majesty to the person to whom it is directed.

The Lord ' Chancellor left the woolfack, and observed, that Lord it was always customary when any bill was brought into. that Chancellor. Houfo, for abrogating an old law, or"enabling a new one, for the person who moved the order of the day, if. the bill had not been previously debated in some former stage, to a ( fig n his reasons for wishing to change the law in the particular infiance. In the case now offered to their Lordships confederation, the noble Duke, [ _ Manchester ] who moved the order of the day, had neglected to comply with that form; which in deference to the legislature, was deemed essentially ( necessary. The bill now under confederation coming per - fe&ly within that description, he begged the indulgence of the House, while he should enter into a short explanation of the laws already in being, upon which the present proposed bill would operate, as a partial repeal, whether they were considered as springing from the common law, which was coeval with the constitution, or fvhether they had been functioned by the legislature, yor declaratory of the common law, as mandatory, prohibitory, or remedial, in inflances where the common law was found to be defective. The acts by which justices of the peace were impowered, his Lordship said, were of a long ( landing; and in the course of several centuries which had elapsed since their inflitution, the original theory, was improved in such a manner as to extend beyond any possibility of excellence, that our ancestors, who frrft formed them, could have conceived; the acts were of such confeqpence, and of such high authority, that they ought npt t, Q be curtailed or extended ^ except the moil solid and well founded feafofis. were adduced for f© doing. The bill now before the Houfp he had carefully considered; he had read it wi£b ? nd turned pvery probable. cen -

fequenceof it in his niind, but it did not in any one parr, convince him of its present necefiity, or of its future utility.

It appeared, tphim as a bill, which wpuld injure rather than

Vok. Ie ' Bh promote

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

promote the furthering of justice, or of those laws which the wifeft, the ablest, and the moll respeflable men had for ages made it a lludy to ena£l for the public benefit. - Here his Lordship gave a moll excellent detail of all the essential clauses in every bill ' that passed respecting the power of jufli - ces of the peace, and ih what manner those clauses directed them to act. His Lordship then observed that the intended este < ft of the present bill was to set aside the conditional forms prescribed by law, for impowering persons appointed justices of the peace to act and discharge the respe£live duties of their

• office. Returns were made by the Lord Lieutenants of the several counties, of persons qualified to be appointed justices. Commissions of the peace were made out in consequence thereof, but only those could act who applied for the ' writ, called a dedimus poteflatemy and who went through the regular ^ and he would add, eftential requifites provided by the statutes enabled for that purpose; such as taking the oaths in court in the presence of the King’s justices or judges, on their re - spe£live circuits in the several counties. This liis Lordship observed, would be a very improper indulgence to be given to any set of men, however high or respeQable; and his Lordship farther said, that the matter was not only of a delicate nature, in respect to its legal consequences, but it was very tender as to its constitutional relult. In short, it was not a matter to be hurried through the House. His Lodship add rifled biimfelf particularly to some noble Lords, and said, he did not doubt but the bill would meet the concurrence of many who wished to be gentlemen justices; that is, to have the pleasure of authority ' without the trouble of doing justice.

His Lordship after several mifcellaneous observations, made a direct application of them to the bill then under confederation. He observed, that the modern justices answered precifely to the ancient conservators of the peace, with this difference, that they had many new powers, and he might say personal jurisdictions, added to what the ancient conservators exercised or enjoyed. According to the common law, the IherifF was the principal officer within - the county, as he was in several instances, and for several purposes at this very day. In all tortious transa£lions, in the apprehending felons, and in supprelfirtg all riots, routs, and unlawful alletnblics, he w ' as authorised to call to his assistance the pojje comitalusy or power of the county to his aid. The fame power was •yelled in the ancient conservators, as the IherifF could not be every where, those conservators exercised in their several. 1 ” - distri&s

i; ifiu D E B A T \fc S.

diilrifls similar authority; they could, like the sheriff, raise the pojje comitatus, and call upori every main from sixteen to sixty, toafiill in preserving the peace; they could upon view or information, repair to the place where the riot, rout, or unlawful assembly was collected, and proceed to difperle or apprehend the persons thus offending against law; and if no head of a corporation, magistrate, or conservator of the peace was present or to be found, the fame power devolved upon the headborough, ’ tithing - maii, See. evdn down to the petty constable ;

It was needlefs to dwell farther, of enumerate the various speties of magistratical power delegated to, and exercised by the magistrates under the common law; but it was very material to hint at fonie of the innumerable additional powers, veiled by a great number of acts of Parliament, in the justices of the peace. They were, within their several jurif - dictions, impowered to call upon all manner of persons, to answer all manner of complaints; they were iippowered to try all felonies not deemed capital, or of which conviction did "not render the offender subject to the puniiliment of death; they were judges at the quarter - sessions on ail prosecutions for assaults, batteries, Sec. they could commit upon complaint, and give orders to apprehend all vagrants, fuf - picious persons, Sec. they could inflift certain inferior punishments, in a great variety of inilances too numerous to re - hearie, and they were veiled with a fuminary jurisdiction in an immenfe variety of other cases, respefling property.

Having thus endeavoured to shew, that the modern justice Of peace had many additional powers veiled in him, unknown to the ancient, conservator, he recited, several clauses out of the acts passed in the reigns of Richard II. Henry IV. V. and VI; to shew that Parliament thought fit to arm the justices with every power necessary for the conservation of the peace; and among others, that of suppressing all riots, routs, and unlawful assemblies; and consequently, that the vvifdom, as well as found - policy of our anceilors ought not to be wantonly set aside, which would certainly be the case, if persons. not regularly authorised were permitted to aft as magistrates.

But he would now proceed to anfwe. r the only arguments which, with all his induftry, he could fbrefee would be urged for the present bill.

Firil, it might be said, that those who would not. be obliged to take out a dedimus potejiatem. agreeably to the tenor '

B b 2 of

iSS PARLIAMENT ARY A. 1781,

of the present bill, might aft in that particular instance only, the suppression of riots, routs, infurr. eftions,, &c. that the present bill would not impower them to aft in any other re - lpeft, but for the purppf ^ s declared in the bill; and that it would impower persons of rank and fortune at all times, to preserve the peace of their respective neighbourhoods, which would never be the case, so long as by qualifying themselves, they would be liable to undergo all. the laborious and fatiguing duties of a justice of the peace, which they mull do if they should take out their dedimus.

On. the first he would observe, what he before had more than once mentioned, that although no slave to ancient forms, he should ever look with reverence and respect towards tho. fe forms which were coeval, he believed, with the cdnftitution, ' and had flood the teft and approbation of ages. - Upon this ground, therefore, - though no other reason existed, he should, for his part, be extremely : cautious in doing what our ancestors, since the commencement of legal memory, never thought of doing; for by the common law; no conservatot of the place could aft till he had received his dedimus potejlatem : it was indeed the very aft which created him a conservator, and meant no more than a short adclrefs to such or such a person, to keep the peace within a certain county, town, ordiftrift; besides which, there were to the instant he was speaking, laws regularly, enacted - for the fame purpose, the most ancient of which were upwards of four hundred years Handing.

' The next probable argument in favour of the bill, he pre - fumed; would be; that the persons entitled to aft, would be only - entitled. to aft in the particular instance of preserving the peace. Here again he was totally at a loss, to know where the exact line could be drawn to separate or distinguish the powers and authorities to be exercised by a. modern conservator and a modern justice; for either the power of the former must be limited and nugatory, or it must partake of I the general powers of a justice of the peace : For instance, sup i pofe that proofs were offered against a person or persons for in - I tending toraifeariot or infurreftion, in that case the persons to be authorised by this bill. would either have a fight to receive informations upon oath, a species of judicial proceeding, or their appointment - would be nugatbry. If the former; then the bill. would create powers disclaimed by - the promoters of it, or it would answer no endv How far their lordships were, prepared to give their sanction to such a law, he would not

A. 17B1. DEBATES.

pretend to say -; but he was firmly determined never to consent to swell the statute - book, by enacting a law which would - be productive of no good, or which, if operative at all, would create powers contrary or repugnant to its pro - fefleddefign. ' -

The last objection was, that gentlemen and persons of rank who had declined to take out the dedimusi would, if the present bill should be passed into a law, have an opportunity of exerting themselves in preserving the public peace; whereas, ib long as the laws in being, which prevented them from a£Hng. in a. magistratical character, without being liable to be called upon to discharge the duties of a justice of the peace, amounted almost to an exclusion. He only dated the ' possibility of such an argument being resorted to, because, if he should hear it gravely urged, or feriously infifted upon, it would be a sufficient reason to convince him that the bill ought to be rejefted.

Not, however, having yet heard any thing offered inTup - port of the bill, though herauft confess he expected the contrary, he should reserve whatever else he had ^ to say till an i opportunity of entering more particularly into the subjefb : might be afforded him. He would, however, just before he j fat down, submit to the noble "Duke, whether, considering i the vaft importance of the bill, of which perhaps his Grace1 was not avvare, it would not be better to get rid of it by the previous question, or poftponing it for three months, instead ;

| of putting an absolute and dire « ft negative upon it ? he only - suggested this as a matter of mere choice; for most certainly,

1 if it should come to the question, he would give a negative to the second reading of thfi ^ bill in some one shape or other.

The Duke of Manchester said, the object of the bill was ' Dukeof j to strengthen the hands of the civil magistrate, and to re - Mar. tbejltr, I move all pretence of calling in the military to aid the exe - 1 cution of the laws upon flight or ordinary occasions.

I His Grace - passed many handfome compliments on the abi - j lities of the noble and learned Lord, and expressed his - ac - I knowledgments for the information he had now got on the subje£f. '

His Grace described the riots in June last; said the inter - position of the military had then become necessary; but contending at the fame time, in very strong terms, that the military power had been -. carried too far iti instances where there. were no riots; and where - th ' er < ? were, it was exercised too long. It was well known, he said, that the tipts were solely

confined

? 9 °

\

Tke Lord Chancellor.

J5uke of Richmond.

PARLIAMENTARY a. 1781 ;

confined to the metropolis, unle ' fs in respect, of the trifling disturbance at Bath; notwithstanding which, the military superceded indiferiminately throughout the kingdom the interposition of the civil power, even, as to the liioft proper and efficacious means in point, of prevention. He censured, in pretty plain terms, the doctrine laid down by a great law authority in that House ( Earl Mansfield ), that soldiers in martial array might be called in in the character of citizens to assist in suppressing riots; and said, whatever merit was due to those who applied the remedy to the evil while existing, he never could deem it confiitutional to maintain, that soldiers under martial law, and totally at the command of their officers, could, in the proper sense of the word, be deemed citizens; and he would; ha ^ he had the honour of a leat in his Majesty’s councils, never have consented, much lei ' s, advised, the employing the military, in the manner, and to the extent in which they had been employed.

.. He begged leave to repeatj that, in his opinion, some means ought to be devised, to prevent the neceffity of calling in the military; and he did not yet despair. of seeing the time when such a neceffity would no longer subsist : —At present he could only. say, that he. would accept of the - learned Lord’s proposition; that of poftponing the second reading of the bill to that day three months.

The Lord Chancellor then put the question, that said bill be read a second time on. that ' day three months; which was agreed to.

The third reading of the militia bill being then moved for, the Duke of Richmond rofe, and informed their Lordships, that he had, the preceeding day, flated his principal objections to the bill before them; but as many of their Lord - ships had not. b ^ n then present, he vrould beg leave just to repeat the substance of what he had said; but before he proceeded, it would not be improper, or unparliamentary, to call into his aid a general proposition, laid down by the noble and learned Lord on the woolfack, which would afford one additional argument in support of the clause he was about to offer by way of amendment to the bill before the House. The learned Lord’s words, if he could recolleft right, were nearly as follow : cc When any old established law was - pro 6C posed to be altered, it was a law or ufage of Parliament,

that the person moving a proposition, or presenting a bill. for that ' purpose, should state the neceffity, expediency, ^ or policy of such an alteration. ” The bill before their;. .. Lordship

A. 1781. v - DEBATES.

Lordships came within that - description; and if the reason assigned by the learned and noble Lord was a found one,, it applied to both cases, or to neither; but that was out of the question; for the present bill proposed the alteration of a law actually in being, and therefore demanded a ' strict compli - > ance with the rule. '

His Grace then proceeded, and informed the House that he thought the bill, in its present form, would not have the effect which it was intended to produce. His Grace said, that in the 18th and 19th of his present. Majesty, two bills ' had patted, which declared that the men then raised should not be obliged to serve for more than three years, and that the then expiration of their time should leave them entirely at liberty to return - to their former occupations; or to continue as soldiers, if it was thought necessary to hold the militia still embodied. The bill now before the House ' difefted, that the commanding officers of regiments should apply to the respective men under their command, not three weeks, as the old law specified, but even three months previous to the time of expiration, in order to know if they are willing to continue, and what sum they expelled as a bounty. And this application, his Grace said, was to be made as well to such whose time was near expiring, as to those whose time of servitude was at a greater distance.

His Grace also said, that the aft laid down the Ipecific rules by which the commanding officers were to be guided; all which, his Grace ontended, would tend to injure rather than promQte the intention of the bill. The grounds ori which his Grace oppoied it were in substance as follows : He said, that by altering the Original mode of recruiting in the mariner, now proposed, the men would be invited to combine not to serve under lets than the very high sum of 18I. which, from ail he could learri, they, would assuredly infiftupon, And when it was known publicly through the militia corps, that, a bill which afforded them such an opportunity. had patted, they were so cunning and so knowing that the y would either not serve, or oblige the man balloted for to find another substitute; which substitute would still infift upon the fame high, terms, whether he had been of had not been ' a soldier.

His Grace observed, t ^ at although the balloted man had it in option either to serve, to find a substitute, or to pay a fine of 10I. yet, however strange the folecism might appear, it would be more his interefi : to pay 181. for a substitute than iol. as a fine; and for this reason, if he paid for a substitute, the ' ' parish

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781 *

parish was obliged to remit him half the money, provided that half did not exceed 5I. and he became exempted from again serving, until every member of his parish had been balloted, which was equal to an exemption for life. But if he paid the fine he was to be called upon, again in three years, and then obliged to find another substitute, which would make him a lofer; because, in the one case, he must pay but 13I, for life, and ih the other, 10I. every three years. His Grace observed, that there were not in the present mode of recruiting the militia, any tvyo regiments that adopted the fame system. Some obliged the inhabitants to find fublii - tutes; others took iol. in lieu, and for that firm found fub - ffcitutes; whilft ' some had reduced the bounty - money, or price of substitutes, to a much lefler sum. Among the latter, was the regiment which he had the honour to command himself; the price of men in which was no more than 5I. each. It was, besides, not only the largeft battalion, but the moll complete in the kingdom, there being now in their shoes the full complement of Boo men. This method of permitting the commanders to make the best bargain they could, was, in his opinion, for he found it so, the cheapest for the service : while it reduced the price of substitutes, prevented combinations, and gave to that regiment which adopted the mode of accepting iol. in lieu of a substitute, an opportunity, of creating a iiock purse; which fund was most useful, because there were paid out of it ten thousand little incidental charges, that otherwise would become a tax on the nation, and of course must be paid, out of the extraordinaries. His Grace understood that there had been some time since a meeting of the militia Colonels at the St. Alban ’ s, tavern, where it was allowed, that the best modes of completing or ' recruiting the militia was that which he took the liberty to suggest; and that the mode now prqposed, of spe : cifically laying down particular rules, by which, each commanding officer was to be governed, would impede the service, and raise the price of substitutes; it would operate as a notice to the men to enter into a combination, and fixthp price of their carrying arms.

The great number of laws already in being respecting the militia, he observed, would fill many volumes in folio were, they put together; notwithftaoding which, another law was now proposed to, their Lordships consideration, which would swell the code, and add to the difficulty and embarrassment. He profeffed to have nothing more in view than the good of die service, which could never be more effectually promoted

193

DEBATES.

than by leaving men at their liberty to act for themselves $ because b ythat means they would ' have the satisfaction of thinking that they had not been trepanned, but had a£ted entirely upon their own judgement. •,.

As to th ' e apprehension suggested of the regiments being incomplete, in a moment, when an actual attack may be made, in his opinion it would, if such an apprehension ex - ifted, be found to be merely ideal. There was a spirit in this country, which in such a Crifis, would effect more than any profpebt of reward. If ih fi ch a moment of public alarm and public distiigfs, men were wanting to complete the ' militia corps, which was hardly probable, they would be collet cd, not by the profpeft or expectation of pecuniary reward but by one of the most powerful motives by which an Eng - lifhman could be actuated; a love of his country, a personal pride, and a firm attachment to the constitution, under which he was born, and by which he had been prote£fedi This was not merely an opinion founded in {peculation, a recent instance had fully confirmed what he had now averted. When Plymouth was menaced by the enemy, the last year but one, there were an hundred of the Devonshire milita jwhofe time of servitude was expired, and of course they were i at liberty to return td their own homes but what was their con dust in the moment of danger ? instead of returning to their wives, families, or relations, they attached themselves to the corps to which they belonged, nor ever quitted it as long as their services were deemed necessary, nor. till the enemy were acknowledged to have for some days returned into port. This would always be the case when the men were well treated by their officers, and proper care taken to convince them that no hardship was imposed, but inch as was absolutely necelTa - ry, or arose from the nature of the service, and ultimately tended of course to the general defence of the kingdom.

His Grace then read a clause,. which he meant, - he said to submit to their Lordships -, fie would qot offer it till he knew what the sense of the House would probably be, or rather that of administration, well knowing ' what little chance offucceeding there would be if administration thought. fit. to set their face against it; — the proportion he meant ter iniove, by way of clause, was, that it might be made optional *

C c ., and

94

Lord St ' or -

JBQXt,

Duke ' of Richmond »

PAR tT A MEN TAR It

A.

and not obligatory in the men, to declare whether they would engage again at the expiration of the term for which they

engaged.

Lord Stormont said, he had considered maturely the objection which the noble Duke yesterday made, and had consulted others, who, from their great military knowledge mu ft be competent judges, but he could not, for his own part, nor could those to whom he had applied, find out that mischief which his Grace had stated to be the probable consequence of paffir. g the bill. In his apprebension the noble Duke had taken up his opposition on what it was difficult to understand. The bill in question, was merely to this, effect : it required the men to be balloted for fix months before they were wanted, and the noble Lord; and his friends thought it requifite because it was impolitic as well as dangerous to let the expiration of the present troops, serving, run out before the nation wasfecureof substitutes tofucceed themfor in such - a case, - the kingdom might be left in ' a defenceless state. His Lord - ship said, that the present bill did not prevent commanding officers from making what bargain they pleased; nor did it in any re"spe£fc alter any of those former modes that were conducive to recruiting the militia; it only provided ’ against possible danger, and in that case ought to meet the concurrence of the House. His Lordship farther said, that he endeavoured to collect the noble Duke ' s meaning in his objections of yesterday, and wished to coincide with them if they were proper; but that on the closest investigation, there could not be any reason found for acceding to his‘Grace ' s proposed clause.

The Duke of Richmond replied, that the optional clause, which he would have introduced, would answer every purpose desired; that it would be an imposition upon those whoj had served, or had been balloted in; that it would encrease the ] price of substitutes double, if not treble; and hurt the recruit - 1 ing service; that, for his part, the price paid to substitutes ini the regiment he commanded, was no more than five guineas; and at the instant he was speaking he did not wantafinglej man; yet he was doubtful that the present bill would foonj affect the recruiting service in such a manner ' that he ftiouldj not be surprised aafoon as it was pafted, if twelve or fourteen pounds were demanded.

The question ' was then put on the third reading; :, and a - gree ' d to without a division.

A f78i 13 E - S - A T E Sj zgjj

March 28 - -

This day a motion was made by Lord Mansfield, that the petitions of the several parties, claiming the offi. e of Lord Great Chamberlain of England, be heard at the bar of that - House by counsel, on Wednesday the 2d of May.

The report on the limin ^ ton enclosing bill being received from the committee, the Lord ' Chancellor gave notic - e, that he would on Friday, moy. e to have the fame re - committed, and would of course give orders that their Lbrdfiiips be sum - tnoned for that day,

March 29. '

This day his Majesty came to the House, and gave the royal assent to the custom, discount, and five per ceriu excise bills, and a few other public and private bills.

. - March 30.

As frion as the order of the day, for receiving the report of the llmington incTofure bill was read, the Bishop of Stle ' av‘ David’s [ Do&or Warrenj rofe, and made. a short prefatory discourse, in which he acquainted the House, that as the mode of commuting tythes for lands in bills of in closure had long appeared to him to be very improper, on many accounts, and as this mode was adopted in this bill now under consideration, he had proposed in the committee above flairs,

, on Wednesday la ft, - ' to amend the bill, by leaving out all the daufes in which land is given to the Redlor, by way of corn - i pensation for his tythes .; but the amendment not being agreed to, his design now was to make a motion for rercommitting; die bill, and had for this purpose desired to have the House summoned.

i After this preface, he observed, that the rights of the church in general, and of the parochial clergy in particular, were involved fn this queflion; and he had therefore ^ he was sure, no occasioh for making any apology for the trouble he was going to give the House. He dated that tythes were the constitutiQnal maintenance of pcclefiafticai persons in - this country; that ^ he law for compelling the payment of them v was at lead of a thousand years {landing. That the doctrine in Westminster - hall, arid all our law - books, wasj that all lands are Aythable jure communi; g. nd in compliance with this notion, and agreeably to this maxim of law, when in - cloffires were first made, incumbents were always permitted / ’ •. C c 2 to

PARLIAMENTARY A. i8j,

to take the tythes of the lands inclosed, in the famemanner as when open; adding, that it had been the uninterrupted custom till lately to have incl ' ofed lands subjedfc to the payment of tythes in kind : he believed the innovation was not of more than thirty years standing.

The first reason was, that this practice tended to bring Jand into mortmain; which was one reason among many why our ancestors thought tythes the best and propereft maintenance of ecclesiastical persons.

Secondly, commuting tythes for lands was improper, 2s tending to render our clergy more secular, the income arising therefrom being eailly managed. The incumbents neither plough, fow, nor reap, but when employed in country bu - finefs, from one end of the year to the other; and thus immer - fed in worldly affairs, it will take them off from the faithful discharge of the duties of their sacred fundiions; and though they might free themselves from this trouble by letting their lands, yet, considering the scanty incomes of many of the parochial clergy, theyr would be induced to occupy these allotments themselves, with, a view to make a better provision for their families. v

Thirdly, a compensation in land would open a door to fraud. Parishes of any confulerabie extent he said, consisted partly of old inclosures, and partly of common fields; and when these last were inclosed. and made exempt from the payment of tythes, it was usual for the occupiers to threaten 1 the incumbents to plough up the new inclosures only, which are now. become tythe - fret, and to keep the old inclosures in grass, they being subject to ty the, unless the incumbents will consentto let the occupiers have their corn - tythes in the old inclosures at a very low price. This was a very obvious piece of craft, and was pra£lifed every day to the great detriment of the parochial clergy.

He next objected to this pra&ice of giving lands in lieu of tythes, because it often tempted the incumbent to collude with the patron.

Patrons are frequently lords of the, manor, and, as such, are commonly the principal proprietory of the land, This being the case, the patron forms a design of inclosing the pa mifh, and communicates it to the incumbent, who readily consents, 2nd only act; s3 that care may be taken that the allotment to be made in lieu of his tythes may be equal in value to them. The patron promifes to take care of this, ar/d to free the incumbent from all apprehensions, engages to farm

A 1781 -.

DEBATES.

{he allotment of him at ^ as higha rent, as he ever made of the tythes in the best times. The inclosure takes place, and the Npatron hires the allotment of the incumbent on the fair terms hsproposed. In a few years the incumbent dies, or is removed; a new incumbent succeeds, who propofes to let the allotment at the fame price his predecessor had done, but finds that he cannot get so much by half, and finds also that it is really worth no more. As the facility of pradfifing this fort of col - Jufion flowed from a bare consideration of the case, it was remarked that there was no occasion to produce any instance, since the poffifiility was sufficient in point of argument; but if it were necessary, his Lordship added, that he had an in - Ihnce now in his nfind j which, if it were required, he yvould mention.

A fifth, reafo ’ n might be drawn from a consideration of the difficulty of cultivating the allotted lands in such a manner as to make them of real benefit to the incumbents.

It ' had been usual to insert in the inclosure bills, a clause for enabling the incumbent, with t, he consent of his diocefim, to let the allotment for twenty - one years. This latitude was given, that the person who might rent it should have sufficient encouragement to treat the land in a good husband - like I manner. The incumbent would be glad to occupy it him - I self, in order to add a little to his. present income; but as it I would perhaps require seven or eight hundred pounds to stock I a farm of this kind properly, it would be totally impra&ica - ble, very few of the parochial clergy being able to advance half that sum; consequently when ' the terms are expired, f the incumbent under such circumstances will be under the t neceflity of letting his compensation in land much below its true value. It sometimes happened, that when even his al - lotment was fenced in,. that nobody would offer himself as te - s nant; an instance of the kind having come to his knowledge in the diocese of Lincoln; which as it produces nothing,

| had caused the performance of divine service to be disconti - nued; adding, that if far many inconveniencies were found in this mode, though in its infancy, instances of the kind would I continue to multiply, when the barns erected on these allot - mehrs became ruinous, 3nd the fences out of repair. Where - ! as if the old mode of taking the tythes in kind, or commut - 1 them for money had been continued, r. ot one of these incon - I veniencies could have happened.

I His Lordship proceeded to answer such objections as he I thought would be made to his proposal; and under this head I went through all the cases of inclosure, Firff, he considered 1 parishes

2Q$

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781,

pariflies confiding of open field lands only; next, parishes confiding of old inclosures and open fields; and lattiy, parishes confiding of old inclosures, commons, and wafte grounds; and endeavoured to shew, that - in ' all. these cafeS the incumbent, whether re&or or vicar, would reap more adr vantage from having the tythes than an allotment in land, except in parishes confiding of open fields only, and as there were very few parishes of that description, - no - great inconve ? nience would arise, if land or a corn rent were given by way of compensation for the tythes in those cases,

Tythes had been considered by many as a very improper maintenance for the clergy, because they were apt to produce diTpiites, and breed much ill - will between a paflor and his flock j and an allotment therefore in land was much to be wished. He confessed that this argument had weight as well within as without doors, but dill he contended, that it was a very fallacious one. He remarked, that the incum ? - bent always asked a reasonable price for his tythes, because. he always asked lefs than an impropriator did, in a1 ! cases under the fame cireumstances; and if it fom ' etimes happened that a suit was indituted by the incumbent for the recovery of his dues, it generally proved in the end, that the occupir ers were to blame, iince out of ' seven hundred tythe causes which have been tried in Wedminder - Hall, fix hundred and sixty were determined in favour of the incumbents; and thereT fore it appears to be particularly hard that a remedy which is fio detrimental to the real interests and rights of the parochial clery should be made ufe of, on a pretence of establishing peace, when the fa£l is, that the peace and quiet of a parish has hardly, in any one instance, been interrupted by the incumbents themselves.

That tvthes, in the hands of a difereet a. nd judicious clergyman, instead of ' breeding quarrels, he, was perluaded might, and often had, proved the firmest bond of union and friendship between the paflor and his flock. Such a man would always confine his demands within the bounds of moderation, would shew his parishioners how kindly he treated them, by comparing his demands with those ’ which their neighbours were proud to submit to, who happen to live in a parish where the tythes are in the hands of an impropriatorf and by means of these communications, and a little yielding ^ on each fide, it is easy to conceive what mutual efteen} and regard may be thus raised between the incumbent and his. parishioners. But when the tythes are taken away, this

cement

DEBATES. 19$

cement is broken; these opportunities of communication are at an end; and as the parishioners are independent of their minister, so the minister is independent of them.

They will certainly soon forget : the relation they ftancl in to him, and he. will perhaps too soon forget the relation he Hands in to them; and instead of being an adviser. or counsellor, and afriehd, he will fink into the common mafs of farmers, and be as little respefled and regarded at the mean - eft among them.

He begged leave to remind their Lordships, that about sixty years ago, a bill, known now by the name of a Tythe Bill, pahed the House of Commons; the object of this hill was to make all lands ' tythe free for which no tythes had been paid for the last forty years, and to give all money payments in lieu of tythes the force of a modus, in case the payment had been invariably the fame for forty years. The only argument made ufe of in the House of Commons was, that this bill would effectually establish peace and harmony in every parish. When this bill was brought - up to the Lords, they would not impofe on others, nor be imposed on thetn - selves, by a fallacious argument drawn from peace, but shewed. themselves the true guardians and protestors of the rights of the church, by rejecting the bill with the utmost indignation.

He would trouble their Lordships no farther at this time, against thd - principle of the bill, as far as it related to the commuting of tythes for lands, though he made, no doubt of being able to prove how exceptionable the bill was on other accounts; but as he expected this matter would be fully taken up by other Lords, and undergo, a full and impartial investigation : in the course of this debate, he should offer nothing on that head;; he nevertheless thought proper to observe before he fat down, that if the bill were really and truly unexceptionable in all respeSls; yet if the principle he had been Combating was wrong and improper, the amendment proposed by him in the committee on Wednesday last : ought to : have. been received; the persons concerned in this bill, it was true, might say that they had rather have no bill than a bill thus amended $ this in his. apprehension would amount to a declaration; that it would nop be worth their while to inclose, unless they were permitted to make feme encroachments upon - the property of others, in order to add to their own. -

The

2. CO

PARLIAMENTARY A. '

The right reverend prelate concluded a speech of considerable length with expressing his thanks - to the House for their great indulgence, alluring their Lordships that nothing but the zeal for the ancient : - nd conffitutional rights of the church in general, and of the truly respestable and useful order of men, the parochial clergy in particular, could have prevailed on him to have trespassed on their patience in the manner and to the extent he had done.

The Bp of The bishop of Peterborough ( Dr. HinchclifF ) rofe in reply.

Peterboroughp [ e profeffed a willingnefs to meet his learned friend on the principle of the bill. He said, for his part, he took its probable operation to be directed a way very different from that which Bad been chalked out by the learned prelate. He could never discover from what had fallen within his obfer - vation, but there; Were many other instances to which the principle of the present bill might in th ' e nature of things jioffibly extend where clergymen were land - holders and occupiers in their clerical character; several of them had glebe land, which they either cultivated themselves or let out to others. In the present case there was no compulbon upon a J clergyman more than any other; that because he possessed a landed estate for life, that therefore he was obliged to keep j It in his own hands tp occupy or cultivate it.. - j

In his opinion it was optional, and he was no piore obliged. ! to cultivate his lands, to raise the produce of them, and fell i it, than any other person vVho now heard him. On the con - i trary, if he took his tythe in kind, he was obliged, as the learned prelate observed, - to collet : it at no small trouble, and often attended with great vexation; and as he could not consume any considerable part of it, he neceffarily sent the Teft to market, or fold at his own house. Here he acted in the capacity of a farmer, as to the Tale; and considering all citcumstances, he doubted much ‘whether the toil, labour, and anxiety, was much lefs in one way than the other. By having a compensation in land, he avoided pnany inconveniencies, and one in particular which materially affected his ecclesiasticnl character, nay tended to defeat the foie obje£t of the institution of ecclenafligal persons.

It was often of very little consequence, that a clergyman was a good man; that he was benevolent, kind, meek, and : generous; that he possessed every Christian and moral virtue; that he laboured inceffantly, as well by precept as example, in the care and instruction of his flock. If he preached like

an

a. i ? 8t; ' £ > e fi a t £ Si

an angel, he would often, indeed ahnoil : always, preach iri

vain, while those to whom he addressed himself had conceived prejudices and refentments against him and for what ? because only he was a partaker of their property arid labours; lie prefumed he need not prefs this point upon his learned brethren they knew it. It was notorious, and familiarised by common observation and experience. The interest of the incumbent was deemed incompatible with the interest of his parishioners; and the merit of the ecclesiastic was viewed through a wrong and partial medium, when his fair ^ legal established claims, came to be balanced against the interest of his parishioners. Thepaftor was infhort totally funk in the tythe collector; and not what he recommended, but what he fought or demanded was the objeSt which generally was kept up to the eye of those called upon to discharge it.

Another material circumstance he begged leave to mention to their Lordships was this; that by the fdperftitions and acts of the regular clergy in the times of popifh ignorance the secular clergy were robbed or defrauded of their rights. He thought fit to mention this on too accounts : first, to remind their Lordships that the injury done to the secular clergy in those times was afterwards confirmed by Henry VIII. He put an end to the existence of the regular clergy, but perpetuated the injustice; for, instead of /rendering to the church what had been unjuftly taken by monkifti fraud, he created lay impropriations, the possefibrs of whom retain the property originally intended for the maintenance of the secular or parochial clergy *

This produced a kind of mixed property, which was now distmguished by the appellations of reftorial and vicarial that is to say, the lay impropriator, who flood in the shoes of the regular popifh clergy, frequently held the great tythes £ while the vicar, to whom was committed the care of fouls received only the small ones *

The bill now before the House, and every other bill of a similar nature, would in some measure remedy that defeat 5 •it would make a certain provision for the vicar, whereas if the vicar had, suppose for instance, the tythe of corn, the corn - land might be thrown into grass, to which he could have no claim; or viceverfa, grass - Tand might be broke up, ' and thrown into corn, to the exclusive benefit of the lay impropriator, and to the injury, or, in some instances, even •ruin of the vicar *

VOL. I I )

This

PARLIAMENTARY

A. 1781 *

This was, in its present shape, a moll grievous evil, and along with all the other mortifications the vicar suffered, left him at the mercy of his parishioners; for in many cases he, was perfuaded, if the parish thought fit to confederate against their paftor, they might easily deprive him of the means of subsistence according to local and other circumstances.

On the contrary, by setting out his portion in land, his income would be better secured; he might let or occupy as he thought fit or convenient; and his having no call or demand on his parishioners, would, render him independent; he meant, give him that fort of independence which would enable him to discharge his duty, because he would stand in relation to his parishioners as a man of property, in the fame light with every other man, upon his moral character and means of livelihood. He would pof - feis, besides the advantages arising from hisr clerical character, which would smooth the way to that species of influence or authority every paftor, to be successful, should have over his flock; because every obje£t of worldly contention or personal interest, being removed, whatever he said would be attended to with that degree of deference and re - fpcCt, which "was due to a person who had no other motive to admonish, to perfuade, or reprehend, but what was ultimately directed to the spiritual benefit of those who were committed to his care.

The Earl of The Earl of J ' VeJlmorelandperfectly coincided in sentiment,

^ iand i0re“ with the learned prelate who spoke last. He was fa -

tisfied of the, justice, and was convinced ft ill more of the expediency and found policy of passing inclosure - bills in general, and of setting out to the parfon a certain portion of land in lieu of tytfies. Land would always bear a certain and proportionate value; and was not like money which was constantly undergoing changes in relpect of its relative worth; such a mode of ' commutation would likewise be productive of many other consequences of a very beneficial and desirable nature, so far as it would operate towards promoting a good understanding between the clergyman and his parishioners, which would give additional weight to his doCtrines, and create a proper respect for his person and example. j Taking tythe in kind, or commutations in money, he ! corffidered as a source of perpetual strife and ill - will, and as thecause of inveterate and incurable difagrements between ! the paftor and his parishioners. It was hardly to be expect - i ed that the flock could be much edified by the instructions of ;

a mani

i

203 '

A. i7 « r. DEBATES.

a man whom they considered as their daily oppressor, and lharing with them the fruits of their laborious induftry; nor on the other hand could it be expe£led that the pallor would be so languine in conveying his spiritual benefits to those who were constantly deviling new means to liarrafs, teafe, and perplex him. It was not to be expe£ted, nor could human belief be so far llretched as to prefume that men would be converted to good ways, nor the preacher liftened to with reverence and respe£l, when he was the perpetual obje£l of their personal enmity, and the supposed author of the heavieft grievances they had to complain of.

In other respefls taking tythe in kind, or commuting it for money, - where the farmer was obliged to pay nearly the full value, was a great discouragement to agriculture and every species of improvement. It mull be very obvious to every noble lord who heard him, that the land - owner and landholder were frequently deterred from improving their farms or estates, merely on account that it would create or lay the foundation of a tax upon their own property; for inflance, suppose a man laid out a considerable sum of money to improve a freehold or leafehold estate; in that case he would, besides having the interefl of the money laid out to charge on the improvement, have an additional tax laid by the reftor or vicar; which, as he observed before, mull continue to operate as a discouragement to the reclaiming of barren lands, and an ( higher cultivation of grounds more capable of improvement But when this odious and unpopular tax was, instead of being arbitrary, at the will of every new incumbent, and as it frequently happened, was. annually exercised according to the caprice, litigious disposition, or avarice of the fame incumbent; when the ' Turn was fixed, and tax certain, not contingent, the landholder or farmer then proceeded, with zeal and alacrity, under the idea of perfect security, that he was working, toiling, and advancing his money for himself and not for another. He did not rest his argument upon theory or hypothetical reasoning, he would appeal to every noble lord present, if this was not the case in a greater or lefs degree in his own neighbourhood, and where inclosures had taken place, whether the face of the country was not totally changed for the better, and whether of course more grain in the corn inclosures; and more grass, where the rearing and feeding of cattle and sheep were preferred, was not the consequence ? There were other reasons equally cogent which might be urged, both ' for the inclolihg

Pda -. Ok

04 PARLIAMENTARY *. A. 1781,

of land and the apportioning a certain part of the land so inclosed to clergymen; he should content himself with briefly hinting at one, and it was this; that the man who had a certain number of acres which he could call his own in the first instance, and free from tythe in the second, would prize it more than double the quantity in common, and subject to pay tythe, and that on a very simple and obvious account, because the labour, induftry, and money laid out upon it, would be all his own as well as the foil, and he would there ? by have an opportunity of adding to the value of his estate, which would be impossible so long as the foil continued.. to be unascertained, and remained liable to be taxed by the re£tor or vicar in a sum, in many instances, equal to the annual value of the foil.

$arl of The Earl of Coventry on the fame fide, went over partly

Civentry. the fame ground, and expressed in very warm terms his per - fe£l approbation of commutations in preference to tythes, particularly commutations in land; and experience in this, as well as in all w. ordly transaclions he said, was the belt guide} considering it merely in that light, he therefore believed it would be found almpft universally true, that in tfiofe parishes where commutations had taken place, they were productive of peace, good will, and good neighbourhood; that the paftor was happier, more respe&ed, and in factc easier in his cireum - stances, while his parishoners remained no lefs contented than amicably disposed towards him.

The learnjed prelate, who opened the debate, seemed tp lay great ffrefs upop one circpmftance, which was, that by making the parfpn a landowner, it would draw his attention to cultivating of his land, and of course occasion him to neglect the sacred functions of his minifiry. He believed when the tythe was taken in kind, it rather made against the ponclufion drawn by the learned prelate than for it; but eyen suppofing that not to he the case, he could eafjly conceive, that his attending to hi ? Worldly affairs for fix days of the week, might be well dif - perifed with, if he dedicated the feyeDth tp discharge the func - iions of his miniftry, which day was set apart by God himself for that purpose. The clergy taken ' in the aggregate were. besides a very numerous body, and notwithstanding the very high reverence and respefl : he entertained for them, he < 3id pot kpow, when nptft&ually employed in their proper yp ? cation, how they could pa - fs their time better than in render - : ing themselves uiefui members of society, and attending tp fhpib fppqrps which f ycry evpfy deferijmop was

- - kpunij

A. i}8x > DEBATES; $©5

bound to perform : in short, though the parfon might act as a farmer for fix days of the week, and thereby render him - - self a ufefiil member of the community and serviceable to his family, he would not by that be prevented from instructing his parishoners in religion and morality on the seventh. He would indeed, in his opinion, by such a meritorious conduct unite example and precept, and of course convey to his flock pra&ical as well as theoretical instru£tion.

The Lord Chancellor being in his place observed, that when i, onj Chan a point of such great and extensive importance came before cellar. ^ their Lordships, it was befiting their Lordships - dignity to treat it in a stile of gravity suited to a subject, the decision of which might affe£l great numbers of the most respectable members of the state in one point of view, no lefs than the whole body of the clergy of England, the whole of the landed interest, no inconsiderable discription of men, and all those who rented lands, and who obtained a livelihood by agriculture or grafing. There might be occasions in which levity might ' be excusable, though he confefied, for his part, he should ever wish to fee it avoided within those walls as much as possible; but at present, whether it arose from a stile of thinking and acting peculiar to himself, he could not avoid remarking, it appeared to him, that jelling on the present occasion was ill timed, and laughing indecent. *

The question to difeufs, to which their Lordships were called by summons, was such as called for much serious consideration; he was extremely pleased therefore to perceive so full an attendance, for he thought it not solely impertinent to declare, that in all cases, in which he had the misfortune to differ from the noble Lords when the House was indifferently attended, he felt much on two accounts; first ’ that his opinion might have uridue weight and bia; that of others, and in such an event, that his errors should for the want of more able assistance and a full House, pass as the mature decided sense of their Lordships.

This was a species of internal responfibility, which he would never wish to be loaded with, and was, he protested, ' the occasion of creating much uneafinefs in his mind; and it qp small cqnfolation to him in the midft of attendances,

which.

# This part of his Lordship’s speech was by way of animadver - fion on the effedfc of what fell from the noble Lord who spoke before him, who had approved of the clergy being employed in their wordly affairs fix days of the week, and the seventh. in discharg ^ ifif their fspiritua} dirties j wljiph caused a loud laugh.

306

, PARLIAMENTARY A. 178 !. '

which had proved for weeks paft so remarkably thin, that so many noble Lords had thought the bill worthy of their notice; his satisfaction was stili the more encreased in hearing the subject so fully, and in his apprehension so ably discussed by the learned Prelate who opened the debate. The arguments urged by the reverend Prelate, seemed to have been the result of laborious research, and deep and sober inveftiga - tion; which, as long as Christianity continued to be the established religion of this country, must at all all times, and on every proper or necessary occasion, challenge in a peculiar manner the attention of the legislature, particularly of that House.

Taking the matter up in that point of view, as involving in it the interests of so respe£lable a body of men as the clergy of this kingdom, the great guardians of the religion of the Hate, and the morals of the people committed to their care; it becomes an obje& of singular importance; but without having any intention to travel out of the question, in order to pay a compliment to persons habited in lawn sleeves or in any other dress than the rest of mankind, the question with him would be, what are the rights of the clergy, as derived from the constitution and confirmed by law ? That, and that only, was the foie object as he apprehended, fit or worthy of their Lordfh ' ips considerations. This should be undertaken free from all partiality or prejudices, private views or local interests. In this temper he was determined to take up the question, and if he should mistake the real ob - je£l, he trusted those who heard him would impute it to its real cause, that of incapacity, and not from a design to mil - lead.

His Lordship begged, before he proceeded to debate the question, to add a. single word, which would remind their Lordships of the difference of pppofing a measure openly, and endeavouring to defeat it by underhand means and managements, acting behind a mafk from motives of ' hypocrify, and others of the most difingeriuous kind, ( supposed to mean a certain noble Earl, who afterwards spoke in the debate, ) for his own part, he should not act in that manner, but was determined to meet the question fairly and take the sense of the House upon it. ” *

The learned Prelate was fully justified in saying, that the rights of the clergy were coeval with the constitution, and had since the first establishment of Christianity in this kingdom, a period of upwards of one thousand years, been veiled ill the nianner in which they were claimed and enjoyed at

ptefentj

A. 1781. DEBATES.

present; and though the Lateran council, held In the eleventh century, ascertained the rights of the clergy in a more precife and specific manner, with the consent and approbation of all the sovereign princes of Christendom, yet the final ' settlement then made and ratified by all the parties concerned, ' was rather a recognition of rights already exercised and enjoyed, than creating new ones which had not been before submitted to and acknowledged, v

. Thenceforward the property of ecclesiaflics, and ecclesiafli - cal bodies and corporations flood upon as strong foundations as those which supported. or secured to the posseflors of any other species of property whatever, ' artd so it continued without interruption till the time of the Reformation. At the dif - solution of the monafleries it was true, as had been hinted ^ early in the debate, a great part of the patrimony of the church went, into the hands of lay impropriators, and soon after, so early as the beginning of the reign of queen Eliza -, beth, the lay patrons and others interested in the event,

| wished to pufh matters Hill farther, and as it were to strip '

| the church of almost every thing file posseffed, by pretended compositions, moduffes, not supported by prescription, and collusive bargains and agreements between the incumbent for the time being, and every person who might have it in his power to force or delude the person in possession, to defeat or injure the interest of his successor; those frauds at last. became so definitive and notorious, that the legislature was obliged to interpose, and by laws enabled for the purpose to prevent all fraudulent or collusive bargains made by the per - ion in possession, to the detriment or injury of his eventual successor; in which, among other things, the bishops or chapters were prevented from making longer leases than for twenty - one years, and the re&ors and vicars longer than for seven, so as to bind those who were to come after them. The rent. or equivalent reserved was not to be lefs than that paid by his predecessor, nor was any modus hereafter to be considered as such which could not be proved to have existed at the time of the p. afiing of that at, and previous to that aft which could not be traced up to what in law was under - flood by legal memory. The univeffities for the fame reaions, were refirited from making any commutation or, receiving any compensation but in corn, which was to bear a proportion to the current value; that is, wheat was estimated at a certain price, ( we believe fix shillings and eight - pence a quarter ) and so many quarters were to constitute the reserved >

3U# PARLIAMENTARY A,

rent, and whatever the corn came to at the future current ' price at the next market town, the university were to be paid to the amount in money. Hence the rights and property of the church, and of ecclesiafKcal and other learned bodies, if they were not restored, whatever part of them, remained were in a great measure secured against future fraudulent alienations, - and proved a strong proof of the wifdom and found policy of the framers of those laws; exhibiting beyond a pofHbility of doubt, that the evils they were intended to correct existed and pointed out the neceflity of keeping a cautious and jealous eye upon all those, who under any pretext would endeavour to alter the tenure, by which the ecciefiaf - t - ical polity was maintained. Innovations attempted upon ancient eitabliflfments, furnished at all times good ground of alarm, and if no - other argument could be adduced in support of it, the conduct and caution of our ancestors held out an example worthy of modern imitation.

. His Lordship after having given a most able account of the first formation of the ecclesiastical polity of this country, and of the various changes it underwent, as to the different modes adopted, but in which he contended the principle in a single instance had never been departed from; next turned his attention to the mode in which private bills were permitted to make their way through both Houses, and that id matters in which property was concerned, to the great injury of many, if not the total ruin of some private families; many proofs of this evil had come to his knowledge as a member of the other House, not a few in hisTprofefiionai character, before he had the honour of a feat in that House, nor had he been a total stranger to such evils ftnce he was called upon to preiide in another place. He did not recollect the twentieth part of them, but he could not forbear stating a few, which had recently challenged his recollection. Through the latter channel he had learned, that there was a family of the name of Gardiner, in Wales, which had been stripped of its whole property by the compendious and certain operation of a private bill. This surely must have proceeded from the most criminal inattention, for he could ngt attribute it to a criminal intention to ruin. the unfortunate and distrefled; indeed, he believed, he might point out with certainty to one source of the evil, he meant the facility, or rather rapidity with which - private bills were hurried through the committees of the other House, where it was not infrequent to de dideupon the - merits of a bill which would affect the pro -, - 4 perty

A. 1781a D £ B A T fe 269

party and ' interests of persons inhabiting a district of several ' miles in extent, in a lefs time than it took him to determine v upon the propriety of issuing an order for a few pounds, by which - no man’s property could be injured. He begged leave while he was on this part of his lubjedf, to stase a particular fast which was reported to him upon an authority which nd person Who heard him would, Ke believed, question after he mentioned the voucher’s name; a man, he would be bold to say, one of the most upright and honest members in either *

House of Parliament, whether those epithets were applied to him in his public or private character; after he said, he prefumed, as the matter arose in a committee of the other House it would be unneceflary to add, that the gentleman he alluded to was Sir George Savile; the circumstance was this : in a committee on a private bill,. a man habited - rather meanly attended the committee, and seemed. to be more anxious and - interested in the business going on than what generally happens in the case of a by - fbander, whoni mere curiosity might have drawn thither. The bill took up some ' time before the members agreed to a report, yet the stranger was not absent fcarecely an instant; at ' length, when the ' committee had finishedj the stranger betrayed visible emotions and an apparent dii - trefs of mind. The worthy Baronet interrogated the man upon the cause of his seeming embarrafiment, Who informed him, that a particular clause in the bill Which had just passed the committee, would involve him and his family in certain ruin; that when He heard such a bill had been introduced jinto the House, he was aware of what he had been just then a witness jto that having nb : means of conveyance, he was neceftitated to walk up to Londbn on foot, and not having money was not able to fee counsel to defend his rights. The worthy Baronet made farther inquiries, and finding the poor man’s ’ ftbry to be well founded, removed all the impediments that stood in his way, by which means an innocent, indigent man and his family. were refeued from destru < ftion. - His Lordship adduced one or two other instances of a fi - milar tendency, and proceeded to pnake several observations on the bill now before heir Lordships, and which the learn - ned ' Prelate moyed to re - commit : he first examined the preamble, which described the property intended to be divided, containing in the - whole "fifty - two yard larids; con -, taining likewise a recital of the names of the parties, namely, tliedord of the manor, the patron of the living/ and the incumbent or retftor The bill then states. the names of five Vol Ii E e person *.

PARLIAMENTARY

persons, who have a right to the common fields in commonable land, to be inclosed, which fields are to be divided among the said proprietors.

He observed, that in the said recital, it was taken for granted, that the patron and incumbent were intitled to certain gleberl, ands; to tythes great and small, or modufles. His Lord - ship then proceeded to examine paragraph by paragraph, every provision of the bill, animadverting and pointing out some aft of injustice, partiality, obscurity, or cause of confulion in each. But as the particular bill itfelf was not the obje£l of debate, but the principle of commutation and giving a portion of lapeLin lieu of tythes; we shall pass over that part of his Lordship’s speech, as being totally irrelative to the debate on the principle of the bill.

His Lordship having finished his animadversions on the clauses, proceeded next to answer some of the arguments retorted to by those noble Lords who spoke in reply to the learned Prelate that moved the recommitment. In answer to the learned Prelate who spoke second [ Peterborough ] respecting the advice given by him to the clergy of his diocese, to conciliate as much as possible the good will of their pa - tifiiioners, by commuting, their tythes at a reatonable value; he was ready to approve of the conciliatory advice, though he mud be of opinion, that the surrender of a man’s property was rather a novel mode of obtaining peace and good neighbourhood; he doubted much, however, if a permanent peace would be obtained, to long as the peace - maker had any thing to give away, or those who were only to be reconciled in this manner had any thing to ask. But allowing this advice to have been found and wholesome, and to be upheld by fafis, confirmed by experience within the diocese Over which the learned Prelate to happly presided, it might not be the exact case in other dioceses; nay, not even within his own, unless he could undertake to say, that he gave the advice generally to all the clergy under his paftoral charge, and that it was universally followed and appoved of by the clergy, as well as their respective parishioners : otherwise, unless the learned I Prelate meant to lay it down in the broad manner he had described, his advice, or the opinion on which his advice was founded, meant no more than an individual opinion of what Was proper to pe adopted, but what might not be adopted; on the contrary, it might be possible, that great numbers of the clergy within his diocese, had cultivated peace and good

neighbour -

A. 1781 ' D E B A T E. S 21

eighbourhood within their respective parishes, though they Hill continued to take their tythes in kind, in preference. to commuations in land or money.

He dwelt much on the absurdity of suppofing that peace and good neighbourhood, reverence and respect, could be en - sured or obtained in no other manner but by a surrender of a man’s property, as if men were only to be bribed into a discharge of their religious and moral duties, by means so extraordinary and unprecedented in every other walk of life.

His Lord ship having spoke for a full hour and three, quarters, said, he did not doubt be the fate of the bill what it might hereafter, that their Lordships would agree to the re - commitment proposed by the learned Prelate. He thought it his duty to take notice how very anxious those were, who of - posed the re - commitment, to found all their arguments upon the general principle of inclosure bills of modern date, the giving a compensation in land in lieu of tythes; whereas the principle here was totally out of the question : the quef - tion before the House was, not whether their Lordships should re - commit, in order to restore the tythes to the patron or incumbent, but whether the House approving of that principle, would pais a bill totally faulty in every other respect; and it was on this ground alone, that he trusted their Lordships would, fend back the bill to a committee, to prevent the injustice, ‘to correct the errors, and to reconcile the in - conliftencies which it rauft remain fraught with, if passed in its present form. He said, if he should be defeated, he should not be at all dissatisfied; all he wanted to be inform -. ted of, was, the real ' on of his defeat. He had no intereffc one way or the other; he was under no prediledtion which could miflead him, or direct him to an improper object : nothing more he Iblemnly protested, than an anxious desire to discharge his duty. If he was beat by fair argument, he IJiould chearfnlly fubmir; and if he should hear any thing vrged in the fnape of argument sufficient to combat his opinions, he would acknowledge his error; if not, he should endeavour to answer them to the heft of his abilities.

Lord Dudley, said, he rofe to vindicate the commirte up - Lord ZW/y Hairs, v/hofe conduct seemed to be in some measure cenfored, as having, like other committees in other places, acted haftily - and precipitately. He did not prefume that the learned and noble Lord meant to direct a particular charge against that committee; but if committees in general upon private bills.

Be 2 acted

. PARLIAMENTARY A. 17. 81,

acted without due information and inquiry, - and if the present. biil was To very exceptionable as the learned Lord had. described it, it was not fbetching the inference too far to say, that the committee were so far blameable,. as not to correct the errors after they were pointed. out "to them. He believed, - however, that the very contrary was the fop. he was a witness to the great care and circumfpedHon taken In respe& of private bills, which he assured jheir Lordships, as a member of that committee, was not at all relaxed; con - ’

. sequently, there was not the Jeaff colour for any imputation direct, or implied, of rWgledf, hurry, - or innatiention *. the committee having waited and patiently heard every tittle, of evidence offered to their corliJeratiors.

; Had the leartred Lord,, for whole abilities he entertained the h - igbeft respect, thought fit to fugged : any objection in the committee ^ he had no doubt but whatever his Lordship might have offered, would be received With all due attention5 but as his Lordihi ' p had neglected what was much more proper to be urged in the committee than on the report,.. hie. con - - sessed, great, as the noble Lord’s authority was, he had heard as yet nothing fufRcient to induce him to change his opinion, r. or was he convinced by any argument whrclrfell from the ■,. noble and learned Lord, that the billl was founded in abfur *

dity,, injuffice, contradiction, or confusion.

- The clause offered by the learned Prelate who opened the debate was reje&ed, and the learned Prelate wished to have ? the bill re - committed, in order to give him ah opportunity of : again moving the clause; yet almost every noble Lord present, agreed with him that the clause was totally unnecessary; notwithstanding which, - it is the only oftenfible reason urged by the learned Prelate for fending the bill a fecqnd time to the committee. ' c

r On the whole, when the advantages and di fad vantages of I inclosure bills were candidly considereff, impartially weighed, : and opposed to each other, he could not help confessing his aftomshment, that any noble Lord who was interested in bills ' of the kind, or; was a witness to the great benefits derive able from individual, cultivation,. and a specification of property, could hefitate an infant"in perceiving on which fide the scale had clearly and decdedly preponderated '.

S ' arlo{Sand - 1 The Earl of Sandwich made a very pointed, difeourfe, part wkb < of "which seemed to be directed to the woolfack. He laid he. could never approve, as. long as he had the honour of a feat. ip that House, of; motions which ' - might, : us. their; ' afpe£h and ‘y. / ’ '. tendency '

A. i, 7 ?. D E IT A T E S ;

tendency, embroil and destroy the peace and quiet‘of the country. He said, a very confi4era. ble part of the landed ' property of the ki ngdom was - held under acts of inclpfure. A great part of his own estate was of that tepure. It had been ari of, en country, and was in a yery rapid ftateofpro - greffive cultivation and improvement ., There. were. a great many instances which came - within ’ his own knowledge, of the evils which aroife from the clergy being ' obliged to take tythes, and he was perluaded, that they would - never be. so. effectually removed as by a general commutation by land or money,, He would ever support the just rights, of the clergy; for in Supporting them, he Ihquld maintain the cause - of religion and virtue. Their rights and property was as sacred and inalienable as any one of ' their Lordships,. They were derived from the constitution, and rauft be maintained or - fall. with it, and he was ready to rilk. his fortune. and his life in their support i ' - -

Among numerous instances of the hardftiips and injuries the clergy daily suffered, he would mention a, singular one which came - within his own knowledge. It was in the parish of Turringdon,. in the Isle of Ely : this parish was infu - lated and surrounded by. high ditches and deep dykes. The. living ;, if the tythe was fairly collected or commuted for - money or land, would, he believed, produce 2000I. per ariri. yet, out of this property, he was perfuaded, that the redtor - procured from it but a mere pittance. He made one attempt tq do himself just, ice, but it milcarried. He attended p take his tythes in kind, but the farmers con ft i ju di ed bridges across the dykes, in order to remove their crops, leaving the, tythe for the clergyman; - which, wh. en they effe£tedr they. demolished ’ the temporary bridges, arid then left the clergyman to get his. property as well as. hecquld, which was out of his power, unless such part. as. hc yvss. able to convey over the bridges while, tlae farmers were, drawing home the harvelb.

It was with no small degree. of embarralTment he; ventured to d, iffer from the noble Lord on the woolfack; nor lbould he have rofe had he not been invited, as - it were, to give. an opinion. on the subject, by the manner the noble1 Lord had treated it ., The noble Lord, from his ., habits of life, had not an opportunity of being acquainted with several circum - n stances necessary, for a clear and perfect understanding of the \ receiving, ty - tHqs : in - kind, and; commuting; for them in land oe mopey tho. ughr. it - incumbent to, make this observa *

214

PARLIAMENTARY A. ijgi

tion, the rather because, he was sure, if the learned Lord was in possefHon of those circumstances and fa£ts so necessary to form a judgement of what was fit to be done, the learned Lord’s feelings, his humanity, and his eager desire to promote peace, happinefs, and good neighbourhood, would have led him to give his warmeft fujpport to the bill, instead of oppofing it. He hoped the learned Lord vyould excuse him; but, for want of proper information, he found himself obliged to declare, that as far as he was able to form a judgement on the subje£t, his Lo. rdfship had conceived notions extremely repugnant to those he would and mull have conceived, had he been sufficiently informed on the iubje£l. The noble and learned lord, in his zeal for what he con ? ceived to be the rights of the clergy, treated the supposed differences arising between the incumbent and his parishoners as so many weak and childish apprehensions. He would not enter into a difeufiion how far those bickerings and disputes were always well founded; but this he was free tp say, that many persons, and some of them able, well - informed, - and instrufted by the most unerring authority, ' that of experience and ocular demonstration, would be apt to consider argu ? pients founded in alarm and apprehension for the rights of the church, full as weak and unfounded, if not more weak and childish, than any which had been suggested to shew the expediency and found policy of adopting every measure, con ? fiftent with the rights of the respective parties, which might promile to remove all causes of discontent and parish - contro - versy. -

• He had mentioned one instance of a case which came within his own knowledge, in which it would be the happieftcir - cumftance imaginable, if the incumbent had had his share carved out for him - in land; and he was sure, that vyere he to consult his memory, he could quote similar prpofs, which would take up their Lordships till midnight to recite. He vhad frequent opportunities of knowing it himself;. and in his neighbourhood, which had been an open country, but was now happily inclosed, {he would say happily for all the parr ties ) instead of the parlons and farmers being perpetually quarrelling and going to law, all was harmony and good neighbourhood. - The revenues of the church, in - point of actual receipt, were considerably encreased, the landed property was much augmented in its annual value, and the farmers grew rich. He had himself, he was free to confess, pror fired considerably as a land - owner, and was anxious to extend

2

235

A. 1781, DEBATE S.

tend those benefits to other parts of the kingdom, though he ’ had no profpeft of ' being a partaker, or to reap the leaft advantage; nor could he help repeating, that he saw no inducement there could be to obstru < ft inclosure bills, unless it were from a wish to breed discontent, and create animolity between those who, from every motive of common interest and natural connexion were bound to each other by the strongeft ties.

His Lordship animadverted upon several facts stated by the learned prelate who made the motion of recommitment, ob - serving, that the facts so stated remained ^ to be proved, and if they had been proved, by no means warranted the con - clufions which the learned prelate, had thought fit to draw from them. On the whole, being a real friend to the principle of inclosing, and seeing nothing in the present bill which took it out of that general rule or principle ^ he would vote for receiving the report immediately, and of course give his negative to the learned prelate’s motion for recommitting the bill.

The Bishop of Llandajf rofe after Lord Sandwich. HeBiftopof said, that if the whole of that day’s debate had been confined L ! atldaf - within the limits of the original question of recommitting the Umington inclosure bill, he should be very incompetent to deliver his opinion on its merits. He had been but a few days in town, and had never seen the bill till he came into the House. The light, however, thrown upon it by the learned Lord on the woolfack, the uncommon ability with which he had gone through each distindf clause, the various unanswerable objections he had urged with a force of argument peculiar to himself, had left no doubt in his mind what opinion he should give.

With regard to the incidental matter which had been blend - led with the proper consideration of the day, he should be; ready to meet it in its full extent, whenever a time should be fixed for its difeuffion. It was a question which involved in it a variety of the most important points which could pofi - sibly affe£t the whole of a most useful and respectable body of men, the parochial clergy; and which therefore should not be decided but upon ^ the most mature refte&ion. He would,

1 however, so far enter into the proposition opened by the right reverend prelate who spoke first, as to declare his concurrence in the general do£trine laid down by his Lordship. He meant not to tread over again the lame ground, he should only prels an argument which the right reverend prelate had left untouched.

SiS PARLIAMENT ART ? A; 1781

touched, and which continued to strike his mind, after nine years view of it, with its original ' fbrce. One consequence, Be laid, o ' f commuting tythe for land, was subjecting the clergy to all the burthens cf landed property. ! Some - of th ' ofe burthens had not yet been felt; they. would ultimately, lie feared, be defiruftive; but he begged their Lordships to confide r what must be the fitUation of a clergyman, whole all depended upon the land allotted by the inclosure ? The immediate advantages derived from an incfeafe of income, were more than compensated by the heavieft future, inconvenien - cies, which, as they were remote, were unfortunately neither foreseen nor attended to Taken on either supposition of the incumbent’s occupying the land himself, or letting it to a tenant, the event muff, in procefs of time, prove equally fatal to the church. Ill cultivated, impoverished, and e ' xha ' ufted ground, desolated fences, dilapidated barns, an insolvent landlord, and an undone tenant, must leave the luc - cessor without relief, and without remedy,. to bemoan, in.

■. fruitless wifhes, the ill - judged exchange. - With respect to the ' pre ' sent constitutional provision of tythes, he was free to acknowledge, that it was attended with occasional difficulties, though these difficulties had, in his opinion ^ been confi -. derably over - rated ', both as to their magnitude and frequency. The. clamour raised from the few incumbents who received their tythe. in kind, was studiously propagated, while the fi - lent meritorious moderation of the many who benefited their parishioners by an inadequate composition, remained either unknown, or ' studiously lupprcfled. The question had hitherto been argued only on the idea that there was no third mode. Should, however, the legislature determine, contrary both to his sentiments and his wifhes, to annihilate tythe in future bills of inclosure, he would just hint then, as a, matter deserving their Lordships future confederation, the substituting a corn rent on the principle of the well known aft of queen Elizabeth, which regulates the payment. of referred rents in collegiate leases. There were two aiTertions, he ' said, which had been rather unguardedly advanced by the I noble Earl who spoke last, which, but for the liberal profef - 1 fibns of regard to the clergy, and zeal for their interests, he j ' should have iufpefted to have proceeded from an enemy, ra - : ther than a friend, which he could bot permit to pass unnoticed, or allow the House to be adjourned, and the numerous. attendance at the bar dismissed, unreplied to The coble Earl had asserted, that the parochial clergy of this country

Ai - ijSi, t ) E B A T E Si 217

country were amply provided for. The only answer he should make, was ftatirig a Angle fact, from which, uncommented upon by him, he Should leave their Lordships to draw their own inference. The livings which did not exceed 50I. a year would riot receive their complete augmentation in lefs than thrCe centuries. *, The second affertio ' n of the noble Earl contained a charge of a heavy nature indeed, no lefs than that of a premediated deflgo to encroach on the rights of the laity.. From whence did the noble Earl collect his evidence of this design ? Did the learned Lord on the woolfack frame, or was he only a subordinate agent in this hardy project ? how came the right reverend Prelate, who espoused the fame fide of the question with the rioble Earl, to have opposed this - beneficial plan ? The learned prelkte concluded with observing, that the clergy, of this kingdom felt and acknowledged the blelfings of an establishment fixed and ascertained by law. Incorporated with the laity, connected in one common interest, citizens of the state, holding their property by the fame laws, they mud be mad indeed could they, for an iiistant forget the obligations they owed to a lay legislature j or entertain a thought of engaging in a combat Which must terminate in their inevitable ruin.

: s The Bijshop of Peterborough rofe a second time, in order to - j ^. $p. of answer Something which fell from. the noble Lord on the ? eu > bo - ivoolfack. - Hefaid, he always paid a proper deference

what fell from the learned and noble Lord; but he hoped his Lordship would exc ' ufe him from taking any thing as proved ^ merely on the authority of a name, for however high his opinion of any irian’s abilities might be, or exalted his cha - rafter, as long as he had the honour to At in that ' House he should think it his duty to deliver hisfentiments freely upon any question submitted to his consideration. And, regardlefs of whom he might have the misfortune to differ with, hewasmuch more anxious to act right, agreeably to his own judgement, ’ thari run the riique of adfing wrong in direct contradiction, to it.

His right reverend friend, the learned Prelatej who had opened the debate ^ had opposed the present bill principally on account of the allotment carved out by it for the re£tor in lieu of, tythes. To that point he chiefly spoke when he first rofe, and he must declare, that he heard nothing from the learned and noble Lord Sufficient to induce him to change his mind, or becoihe a convert to the learned Lord’s opinions ;

Vol, L F f con -

ai8

Viscount

Stormont.

t > nke of Richmond »

PARLIAMENTARY. ' JLiyl/i.

consequently, he would give his negative to the motion made by the learned Prelate for fending the bill a second time to a committee.

Viscount Stormont said, he had befen so perfectly convinced by the arguments urged by the noble and learned Lord on the woolfack, that he felt himself bound to vote for the recommitment. He did not at the fame time commit himself so far as to oppofe the principle of allotments in land, anji commutations indiscriminately, and in all given circumstances and lituations; nor on the other hand, to prefer tythes in the lame manner. He believed either principle rigidly adhered to would be productive of great inconvenience, if not of - preflion and injuft ice; but in the case before him, putting the principle out of the question, the noble and learned Lord had, in his apprehension, stated so many lolid objections to the enaCting clauses of the bill, that, be its fate what it might hereafter, he thought it improper to pass it in its present form. He should not attempt to trouble their Lordships upon a subject which had been already so fully ' and ably difeuffed; much lefs would he go into a detail, respecting the impropriety of several clauses, the fame having been so clearly pointed out by the noble anddearned Lord. But under the impressions the learned Lord had made upon his mind, be was perfectly convinced, that the bill ought to be sent back to the committee, in order to be amended.

The Duke of Richmond said, however disagreeablejt might be to him to differ with the noble and learned Lord upon a subject Of this kind, he must say, in every Engle point of view he considered it, he highly approved of the bill, and would of course vote for its being passed into a law. He confirmed, so far as came within his knowledge, which he said had been pretty extensive, the inexpediency of taking tythes in kind, and the numerous law suits, disagreements, and bad blood, it occasioned between the incumbent and his parishioners. In those. parishes where tythes were taken in kind, it brqd perpetual animosity and dispute; and even as to the point of emolument he lolemnly protested, that he believed upon an average, the clergyman would be much better off by making a reasonable composition, by which his parishoners Would even be considerable gainers than by col leCtirig his tythes in kind.

If the question was merely this, shall the tythe be taken in kind, and shall it amount to a fair tenth of what the produce would be ^ if thete was a compensation in land or money I

In

219

A. 1781. DEBATES.

In that case, np - comp. olition however favourable to the clergyman would be an equivalent. But when the rheans those, who were to pay the tythe in kind took to make the Parson’s part of as little value to him as possible, the number of hands, carts, &c. necessary to the collecting the tenths, the, uncertainty of the weather, but above all, the discou - ragement it gave to cultivation, and the methods resorted to by the farmers, to forbear that species of husbandry which was best calculated to produce the most ' valuable tythe crop; he sincerely helieved, that the incumbent did not receive in kind, after all deductions, any thing like what the fame land would produce if it had been tythe free *

Sp fer as to the principle of the bill, —which as well as hp was able to judge, feerhed to be totally but of the question. The learned Lord had indeed confessed as much, for he complained that the principle had been dragged into the debate, find prefled into the service of those who argued against the re - commitment, merely to puzzle, confound, and millead those, who, approving of the enclosing the lands in question, might nevertheless wish to have the clauses amended. Here jt was plain the noble and learned Lord had forgot himself, and even overlooked the grounds on which the motion was maintained by the learned Prelate who made it 5 that was, that enclosures in general were injurious to the clergy, that they were injurious in other instances, and that the circumstances under which they could prove serviceable, were io very few, although they ' might be productive of great evil,. no solid advantage could result from them. The noble and learned Lord held nearly the fame language, and by treating the accounts of parifli aifputes between the flock and pallor, as mere fanciful notions, which had no real existence; or if they, had, ought notto. be weighed against the policy and justice of taking tythe in kind, combated as far as in his power the principle of commutation either in land or money.

Yet when the noble Lord has fully debated the principle of the bill, what does his Lordship next do ? He. tells your Lordships, that the principle is totally beside the question, that all your Lordships have to do is to examine the clauses. His Lord fillip then proceeds, and in a very long and learned discourse, points out the numerqus defeCts, absurdities, incongruities, and great injustice, those clauses are fraught; with. To this he had only to answer, that the noble. and learned Lord has urged his objections too late; for,

| as the principle should have been debated before the bill. F f 2 ‘was

220 PARLIAMENTARY A. i ^ i,

was lent to a committee, so the clauses should have been dif - cufled in the committee. The committee he underflood was a very respe£lable one, and the noble Lord who generally presidcs in committees in the Houfp [ Scarfdalc ] presided up flairs in that on the present bill, so that npthing was wanting to give the proceedings all due weight. If indeed any extraneous matter or any thing conthidicting the principle of the bill had been introduced into it in the committee, that would be a good ground for re - committing it; but as no such thing had been pretended, he thought it was now too late to re - model the clauses. He had another objection to part of the noble Lord’s specch, which contained a kind of hiflory of the slovenly manner private bills were wont to be conduced through another House. It was in his opinion, very improper to make ufe of a general argument againsta private bill, unless it particularly applied, and the particular application were pointed out. It was ho lefs improper to state inilances of negle£l, which did not relate to that House ? upon a bill then under consideration in that House; and no lefs so to infer, that every bill was smuggled through the House, to the injury if not ruin of individuals, because one or two inllances had come to his hearing by personal communications made to him by the parties themselves.

After several other arguments equally pointed and flrongj he gave it as his clear opinion, that the principle as well as enabling clauses of the bill, having received the lan£lion of the House in its respe£live flagesj he saw no ground for the motion made by the learned Prelate, expressing at the fanie time Its extreme wiilingnefs to enter into a full difeuflioh of the reasons, facts, and arguments, urged by the learned and noble Lord, whenever his Lordship should think fit. tp ful > mit them to the consideration of the House; and if on inquiry, the mode of conducing private bills through that House should be Found defeflive, or liable to abuse; he pledged hjmfelf, he should be one of the first who would co - operate with ' the ' learned and noble Lord in - removing the evil ’, and in drawing up such resolutions, to be framed into flandirig orders, as would prevent the existence or return of such evils in times to come, iord Sccrf - V Lord Scarf dale said, he had the honour of presiding in the dak. committee, and declared he had feeri nothing in the present bill ' which diflinguished if from those numerous bills of the fame kind, which passed every fession, since he had the honour of a feat in that House, The committee was well af - I. .. ... ‘ " ' teiided,

0. 7, 1

h. I7‘ x. D E BATE S.

tended, fom. e objections had been stated by the learned prelate who opened the debate, and one or two other noble Lords; but they Were over - ruled, and in his opinion very properly so; upon the whole, he retained the fame sentiments now that he did in the committee, and would vote in the affirmative for the third reading, and of course against the re - commitment.

■ Earl ' Temple said, he foynd himself much embarrassed ULuYTemple. when he was obliged to dilTent from the noble and learned Lord, but as far as his experience had enabled him to form a judgment, he was not at liberty to vote for the recommitment.

In answer to some of the general objections stated against the mode of conducing inclofu. re bills in the other House, he must confess, as long as he fat in that House, nothing of the i kind stated by the noble and learned Lord ever reached ht3 i knowledge j yet he had frequent opportunities of knowing, having the honour to represent a very respectable county [ Bucks ] which necessarily drew upon him a considerable deal of attendance, which was generally esteemed part of the < pe - puliar duty of county members.

Jt had been well observed by a noble Duke, who spoke lately, that the proper place to modify clauses, or to maintain objections against them, was in the committee. It certainly was, but suppofing for argument fake, which was not the faCt, that the bill had been hurried through there, and the clauses not properly examined, he could not fee with jvhat degree of prQpriety the right reverend prelate who opened the debate, or the noble and learned Lord who supported him, could mix an argument on the principle of the bill, yuth the objections to the clauses, or apply general abuses, jvhich were prefumed to exist in the mode of conducting private bills through both Houses, to a particular bill to which, in his apprehension, no such objection lay.

The noble and learned Lord’s particular arguments, how - I ever ably arid plaufibly urged, being all founded upon the double1 mistake, that the principle of the bill was now before the House, arid that a prefumed general abuse was a reason against a bill, when no such abuse was proved to exist, he mould hold himself ’ excused froth making any additional ob - fervations, the question having been already so fully and mi -

Inutely difcufted, were it not, that having stated the charge, he looked upon himself bound to state likewise the grounds of it. The noble and learned Lord fays, that a seventh or I eighth ( for he declares his ignorance whether it is a seventh

222

P A R L I A M, E N TA R Y A. 1781.

or eight ) part, which is allotted to the redfor, is not an equitable, fair compofirion, in Lieu of the tythesto which he is at present entitled. What was this but directly controverting the principle of the bill, for if for thirty years paft it has been an established rule followed in the framing of inclosure bills, to carve out such a share as a fair and equitable equivalent in lieu of tythes, it mull follow clearly, that if was not the clauses merely, but the principle of allotment that the learned Lord had been combating. The fame argument held good with respect to the other clauses; such as the nomination of the conamissioners, the modp of carrying the act into execution, the equivalent to be given to the Lord of the Manor, and the dividing the foil afterwards among the freeholders.

His Lordship proceeded to make several observations upon what had fallen from the noble and learned Lord, respecting the clauses, and endeavoured to shew that his Lordship had. miftated or mifconceived almolb every one of them,.

He declared his. entire approbation of the remark made by the noble Duke, that it would be extremely improper to recommit the present bill, though the mode of apportioning out the rights of the parties concerned, had been as faulty ‘ as the learned Lord had described; first, because the obje&ir ons had not been urged in time, but more particularly, because the parties concerned in the Umington inclosure came exactly on the fame footing, and with an equal claim as those who had applied to the legislature for the last thirty years; if for no other reason but that alone, he should be for passing the bill in its present form; because the rejecting of it would not only be a difappointmeni : to those who wished to have it enatSed into a law, but they would "be put or led to a very considerable expence, under the faith of Parliament, and precluded the advantages they expected to derive from if by an ex poJl faSld regulation.

If such allotments or compensations were found to be inadequate, if the church should thereby, if they were to con ? tinue, to bedefpoiled of its patrimony, if incumbents were to be ruined through their inability to cultivate, or by the lands being over - valued or thrown upon their hands; ifpeace arid harmony ^ were not to be promoted, nor the doctrines or person of the, clergyman rendered more respectable and amiable; these were all considerations truly deferring thpir L. ordships rnoft anxious attention. and inquiry. No person who heard him was readier to cp - bperate than he was in iearehing for. truth, and probing it to the bottom; but until their. Lord - ships were convinced of the neceflity of going into such an

invelligation,

A, 1781. DEBATES.

investigation, and of the probable benefits which would re - fult from it; till their Lordships so perfuaded shall have finally come to a determination, to put a flop to such commutations and equivalents; he trusted,; that it would be very difficult to produce one found reason to take the present bill out of the general rule, unless it could be proved that theprovisions of it materially or efl ’ entially differed from bills of the fame nature, and directed to the fame objeCts.

He did not rely merely upon speculation for the arguments he had prefumed to trouble their Lordfhipis with; he had formed his judgment from experience gained out of Parliament as well as within it; he meant in the country and in his own neighbourhood, where there had been vaft tracts of land, common fields, waftes, commonable lands, &c. inclosed; and he could affirm, upon his honour, that during the seven years he acted as a magistrate within the county in which he re - sided, and he was enabled to say, that his attendance at the quarte ' r - sessions was pretty constant and uniform, his memory did not enable him to recollect that in the whole course of his attendance a single appeal had been brought before the quarter - sessions, complaining of any partiality or in - justice in setting out or allotting the several portions by the commissioners nominated by the several acts, which proved so far as this circumstance could be supposed to apply, that the powers veiled in the commissioners had been such as were approved, of by the parties concerned, and that those powers had been faithfully carried into execution. Such being his general ideas, as well on the general principle of commuting tythes for compensations or competitions in land or money, as the particular provisions of the bill now before their Lordships, he found himself under a neceffity of giving an hearty negative to the motibn made by the right reverend prelate.

IThe Lord Chancellor, rofe a second time, and declared, that The Lord. he waited with anxious expectation of hearing something ^ " ^ in reply to the objections he had prefumed to state early in the evening, but he - was sorry to say he had heard nothing which could : lead to a conviction in his own mind that he had either mifconceivecl the object of the bill, or had used any arguments in his speech. but what were fairly suggested by the provisions it contained. He was far, as had been hint - _ ed by a learned prelate who spoke early, [ Peterborough ] from alTuming to himself anyfuperior. abilities, or as layinganyclkim to infallibility. He was too sensible of the vanity of such. pretenfions in any man, and much more so in himself, ' who

wifheef,

PARLIAMENTARY A; 1781. -

wifhfcd rather to pursue an humble line, Tulted to his very •humble talents and habits of life. But difagrccable as it was to be taxed with arrogance and prefumption, lie could much more willingly submit to such a charge, because it could amount to no more than a proof of his folly or ill - founded claims, than ' to have his intentions arraigned, and hrong - ly arraigned, as wishing to difleminatc dilcord and animo fity, for aught lie knew, from one end of the kingdom to the other; lie con felled that he owed more to himself and to their Lord ship’s than to let such an accusation as that go forth into the world without endeavouring to exculpate him - fclf from what he should ever deem to be not only a very ierious, but in his apprehension, a most odious and criminal charge; lo odious and criminal as to render him unworthy of a feat in that House, or among any assembly of gentlemen whatever.

He assured their Lordships, that any infinuation of the kind must have created very uneafy fcnlations in his mind, but when the charge was made directly, it filled him with very great astonishment. He had examined his argument over and over again, he had endeavoured to refrefh his memory, he had laboured to recollect any careless exprellion or plirale which might have fallen from him in the hurry of debate, and which might give a reasonable colour to the censure passed upon him by a noble Earl who spoke some time since, [ suppoled to mean Lord. Sandwich ] but all to no purpose ? and if any expression had dropped from him sufficient to warrant the noble Lord ' s animadversion, he could only plead ignorance or forgetfulness, for hitherto his attempts to recollect them had been in vain.

The words used by the noble Earl were, ee that those who endeavoured to fend the bill again to a committee, ” or words to that eiFect, “ wished to disturb the peace ' and quiet of the country. ” He hoped, that he had given no just cause for imputing to himfo wicked, base, and scandalous a motive, if he had ministered no just cause for such a charge, direct or implied, he made no doubt but their Lordship’s would acquit him of any such intention, and consider this method of defeating an adversary, to mean no more than those ornamental fiowers which men of great abilities, from the warmth and exuberance of their imaginations are apt to mingle in the most grave and ferrous difeourfes upon - the most important ( objects; men, who operated upon thestrong impulfe of unbounded genius, and a rapid conception, suffer themselves to be hurried. away by the tenens dicendi copla, and thereby transgress in tfe

i. i ) 8i. ' DEBATES.

rigid truth andjustice. He prayed, whenever he had the misfortune to differ with persons of such distinguished he might add unmanageable, talents, to sacrifice the love of eloquence, orat leaftfet limits to it, and not to throw a stigma upon him, which if really founded iri truth, would represent him as a monfter and not a man; who though not so highly gifted, would not yield to that noble Lord, nor he trusted to any other noble Lord, in the pride of endeavouring to the belt of his poor abilities, to a faithful, honest, and corifcientious discharge of his duty.

, After his Lordship had pretty fully given vent to his feelings, he proceeded to answer such parts of the noble Earl’s speech as he conceived bore the leaft relation to what he offered in support of the learned Prelate’s motion when he first rofe.

He said the talk though a ncceflary one was rather difficult, the noble Earl having dressed his arguments in such meretricious colours, feirrounded with so many blandilhments, and accompanied with such allurements; they might be said to have been so trimmed and decked out with false ornaments that the question lay buried or hid under them.

His Lordlbip then replied to the several arguments which had been urged in reply to what had fallen from the learned Prelate who opened the debate and himself, very much at length; in particular, he reprehended the noble Earl to whom he nad been alluding, for the indecency of saying, that if the fa£is stated by the learned Prelate who made the motion were true, that they amounted to a general calumny upon the people of England; this1 was ' an unusual expression for one member of that House to ufe to another. The noble Earl had given an hiftory bf inclosing in his own neighbourhood, and of thb great advantages which he derived from it in the improvement of his efface. If in argument he should prefume, that the noble Earlhad exerted all his influence and weight iri that county or ' neighbourhood in which he reflded, to procure those bills to be passed through both Houses, without having attended to the ' interests of the tenants, with that dignity of character, that generosity of mind, and with that dif - regard td any obje£t but that of iricreafing the rent - roll of o - thersj of enriching ' the farmer, and rendering the clergyman easy, comfortable, and respectable, in respeeb of property and the good will and affe£iion of his parishoners; such an infi - nuation might bear a much nearer relation to calumny than any thing. which had been stated by the learned Prelate who made the motion : So much for the morality of the question; as to the religion of it, he made no hefltation to give implicit credit to the noble ' Earl’s ' assertion, that he woSd be ready. Vol, I G g to

, PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

to lay down his life in defence of the constitutional rights and privileges of the Church; but no such sacrifice was requifite in the present instance, the religion of his country was clearly out of the present question, which was neither more or lefs than whether the property which the constitution had allotted for the suppott of the clergy, should undergo a total alteration, contrary to what had been customary for nearly a thousand years. The noble Earl’s argument went that length, or did nor at all apply; consequently he was at a loss to collect his Lordship’s meaning, ’ unless thinking that commutations in land or money were preferable to tythes, he v/as willing to rifque his life in endeavouring to better the condition of the clergy. N

The House was at this time extremely disorderly, so that we could not distinctly hear that part of his speech which wag intended as a ^ reply to the Duke of Richmond and Lord Temple, but it seemed to turn upon this, that the re - commitment of bills was as regular a proceeding as committing them; consequently, be the principle or provisions of the bill what they might, the motion refted solely on the merits, whether or not the objections taken to the latter, were fueji as were worthy of farther enquiry and investigation in the committee, where they had not been at first fully considered.

Earl of The JEarl of Sandzvich declared, he was a considerable time Sandwich, at a loss to know what person the noble and learned Lord had been alluding to, and so ignorant was he that he had made life of any such expression as he at length understood was imputed to him, that he asked feveraj persons near him whether he made ufe of it ? if he had, he was ready to beg the learned Lord’s pardon, for most certainly he never intended to give j his Lordship the most distant cause of offence. He made no I doubt that this declaration would be accepted of as a full apology for any unguarded words he might ift the warmth of debate have inadvertently let flip; as he could with truth allure his Lordship, there was not a person living, for whose charaCler and abilities he entertained an higher reverence and respect; and so far from throwing out any infinuation of a tendency such as the learned Lord had conceived, that he would appeal to his Lordship’s candour, if he did not say, if the noble Lord was fully acquainted with the subject, he was perfuaded his humanity would induce him not to of - pofe the bill r ’ ’. '

' As to the powers of perfuafion and eloquence which the learned Lord supposed. him to possess, his Lordship well knew he neither possessed or laid claim to them. His talents

were

227

A. 1781. DEB ATE S.

were unhappily much circumfcribecl, and as to oratory he never affected it. The raofl : he aimed at was to make himself informed of his subject, and to convey his sentiments in a plain unadorned stile, such as to make what he said intelligible to his hearers. There were others of superior talents, an. d who affected other modes of exprefiion. He envied, no man the talents he possessed, having long learned the folly and absurdity of pretending to be what a man is not.

As to the question before the House, he had heard nothing but what rather strengthened him in his former opinion, having had frequent opportunities of knowing that commutations in land, in enclosure bills, were much preferable to taking the ty thes in kind for all the parties, and he would suggest one additional reason, which did not strike him when last up; that if a clause for commuting land for ty thes, or some other mode of commutation had not been introduced into inclosure bills, no such bills, lb far as they respected cultivated grounds would have taken place, nor that spirit of improved cultivation and the reclaiming poor or ' barren ground would have ever prevailed, and of course we should never have those ex - tenlive inclosures, which are vilible in almolt every cou ' nty in England, and which add at once to the extenlive beauty of the country, to the increase of the aggregate produce of the lands of the whole kingdom, and to the very great benefit of numerous individuals.

The Earl of Radnor confirmed the arguments used by feve~ ral noble lords who spoke in favour of the bill, and against twr, the mption of recommitment, from his own experience. He said at the lame time, he had not come to any pre - judgment on the principle, in the very large and extenlive manner in which it had been argued; he was not therefore prepared to enter into that part of the questioni The only point which Teemed to him to be before the House was this, and merely this; did the present bill differ materially from the enclo - sure bills, which are customarily passed every session ? If it did not, he law no good ground for fending it again to a committee; if it did, most certainly it ought to be re - committed, and in that case, such deviation might be a sufficient reason for totally rejecting it; not having heard any alteration pointed out ( which took i - t out of the common rule, till he should, he mull be against the motion made by the learned Prelate ;

Gg2

The

aaS PARLIAMENTARY A. 17S1,

tari ' of5a/ - The Earl of ' was of opinion, that the present bill

faUm came before their Lordship under the faith of Parliament, and so far as the bill was supported by precedent and justice, it was irititied to their Lordship’s countenance and support, but no farther. The noble Lord on the woolfack had, in his opinion, Rated several strong objections, such, as if well founded, would prove the bill to be not warranted, either in precedent or justice; in that point of view he must con - fess he was for fending the bill ' again to a committee. If those objections could not be maintained no harm could be done, the bill would of course be reported and paf§ into q, law, if they should appear to carry sufficient weight with them, the bill would very properly. be rejected. He did not mean to bind himself by any thihg he how said, as to the principle of the bill, but merely threw out his own fenth ments as they arose upon the state of the argument on both fides.

Biftop of The Bishop of Chester rofe, he said, to express his satisfac -

Ckejier. tion that the question had assumed a very different shape from that in which it Teemed to enter the House. He observed, that he had been given to understand, that the great general question concerning the expediency, of commuting, tythe for land, in the case of inclosures, would be that day debated, and, perhaps, decided; and the manner in which the debate was opened had confirmed him in this idea. Under these impressions he had, he confessed, no small degree of anxiety upon his mind, as a matter of such extent and importance, could not, he conceived, be properly considered and difculfecl on so short a notice, and with so little preparation ' as the oc - casion allowed. But he was extremely glad to find that his apprehensions were ill - founded; and that the abftraCt question of commutation was only an incidental part of the de : bate, - the decifipn of which would not at all depend on the fate of the bill then before the House. The noble and learned Lord on the woolfack had with his usual ability thrown such light on the subject, and made so clear a diflinCtion between the two questions, ' as had given great ease as well as information to his mind, and had had left him under no doubt what part he should take.. The objections stated - by the noble and learned Lord to the bill, under confederation, were, in - his apprehension, so strong and unanswerable, that they would entirely decide his vote. that night for the recommitment of the bill. But his Lordship said, he begged to be undepstood as acting thus fpleiy on the grounds of those 1 ' particular

229

A. 1, 781. D E B AT E S.

particular objections to the clauses of the bill, and not with - an intention to give any decided opinion agai. nft the commutation of tythe for land in the case of inclosures. This was a point of so very wide an extent, and so complicated a nature, that he had not yet been able to form any pofit. iye judg ? ment upon it. ' As far as he could fee his way, he was at present rather inclined ' to think, that there might be cases in Which the exchange of tythe for land might be a delirable thing for the incumbent. In the case of cnclpfing common and wafte land, it seemed to be allowed, that circumstances might exist, which would render it necessary to exonerate the inclosure from tythe, by some substit. ution or other. And he thought also, that there were other cases where it might be equally proper. Irislivings, for instance, which consisted almost intirely of common - field lands; if these happened to be inclosed, and no land was given the incumbent in exchange for his tythes, he might be a very great sufferer, and his ' benefice might be reduced perhaps one half : for whilft the ' lands were open they could not be converted into grass, they must neceffarily continue always in tillage. But when they were inclosed, they might be, and frequently were, converted into meadow or pafture, the tythes of which their Lordships well knew were much lefs valuable than those of grain. Here therefore he thought an allotment of land should be allowed instead of tythe. But whether this should in all cases be allowed, he was by no means prepared to say. He thought that there; were many inquiries to be made, and a variety of fafts to be ascertained, both with respejft to the proprietors of land and the clergy, before the general abstract question of commuting tythe for land could be properly determined. He was therefore very glad to hear that the consideration of this great point was to be put off to a distant day, when he doubted not but it would be examined with that attention,. an4 difeuffed with that deliberation, which a question of such great magnitude and importance required.

The Bishop of Landaff role again, and offered a few words g - ^ p cf in explanation, but said he was well pleased to learn by whatLa ^ jf. fell from the learned Prelate, was not at all to be understood as if the present question was to conclude the lenfe of the House upon the general principle of preferring commutations inland or money to tythes in kind, because he came totally unprepared to speak to it, as malting that obligatory by law which was considered at present as arising from agreements founded on various local circcumstances.

Earl

2. 3 °

Earl

Batburjl.

Earl

B allarjl.

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

Earl Batburjl ( Lord President of the Council ) said, he would vote ' for the present motion, because it did not affect the principle of commutation; but he begged at the fame time to add, that he preferred an equivalent in land, money, - or corn, according to the peculiar circumstances to tythes in kind. He had fat eighteen years in the other House, and eight years on the woolfack, during which time many cases had come before him in another place and at the bar of that House, which fully convinced him, that inclosures and commutations in land were equally calculated for the benefit of the patron, the clergyman, and the, parishoners, How far it might be proper to modify the principle,. he would not pretend to say, but unequal as he might be to the talk, if no other noble Lord should think fit to take it up, he meant to submit some propositions to their Lordships oh the subject at an early day.

At nine o ’ clock the question was put, on the motion made by the Bishop of St. David ’ s, and the House divided; contents for the re - commitment, 23; not contents, 31.

The motion being thus rejected the report was received; the bill read a third time, and passed. Adjourned to Monday,

Jprll 2.

As soon as the private bulinels was over, Earl Batburjl rofe and observed, that a question had started up in the course of the debate on the Ilmington inclosure bill, on Friday, of very great and singular importance; a question, he begged leave to say, which in a greater or lels degree, affedred every foot of land within this part of the united kingdom; the matter he alluded to was, the debate upon the general principle respt ftirvg the policy and expediency of making commutations in land, See, for tythes in kind. Much, he observed, had been urged for and against the principle, though properly {peaking, the question was not Jub judice, or before the House; yet, several noble Lords having gone so far into the discussion of that question, and entertained sentiments lb diametrically opposite on the subject, he thought, that it would be very proper to bring it before the House unmixed with any ^ extraneous matter. Having intimated something of a similar intention, when he had the honour of last addrelling their Lord - fhipfs, he thought himself, as well on account of that intimation, as from the mere necefiity of establishing some general rule lorpreceeding in the framing and passing inclosure bills in future,

A; 1781 '. ' DEBATES. 231

called upon to submit some proportions to their Lordships, which might tend to draw forth a decided opinion on the subje£h

When the fen ' fe of their Lordships opinion should becolle&ed on that point, he had it in contemplation tothrowout fomeother hints, which he trusted might appear not totally unworthy of their Lordships farther consideration. Upon thefc general ideas therefore, he would now move, that their Lordships be summoned for Thursday next, for the pur. pofe of appointing a day to take his intended propositions into consideration.

The House adjourned to Wednesday.

April 4.

As soon as the private business was over, Lord Loughborough Lord Lough - gave notice on account of Lord Bathuift’s absence, and necessary attendance in another place, that it was the noble EarPs wish to have the order of summons which flood for to - morrow, ( Thursday, ) deferred till the next day. His Lordship then moved that this House be summoned for Friday next.

The Lord Chancellor ' observed, that it would be more re - The£ ’ 6 ' ^ gular to discharge the first order previous to moving the fe _ Ci, anceLar - - cond, and then move it, de novo, to whatever ' day the noble and learned Lord might think most convenient. —In consequence of which.

Lord Loughborough moved, that the former order be dif - LordLough charged, and the House be summoned for Friday next. borough.

April 5.

Private business, no debate.

April 6.

Prayers being over, counsel were called to the bar to be farther heard in the adjourned caufs of Wednesday and Thursday last, being an appeal from a decree of the court of fession in Scotland, in which the Rev. D. Johnstone and others were appellants; and Mr. Tlhalniers and others re - fpondents. It was relative to the tythe of fish, landed within the port of North Leith. The court below determined that fish were not tytheable upon importation, on a prefumption that tythe was paid where they wete caught.

Lord

Chancellor,

EeeharJ},

. PARLIAMENTARY A. I78L

The Lord Chancellor rofe, made a very Jong - speech, and drew a line between the contending parties. by iftbving, that such part of the interlocutors complained of, as went to take off the tythe or ' duty paid upon fish imported" for home consumption; he reverfed, and that such part of the fish as was imported fob the purpose of re - exportation be taken off 6r drawn back; which was ^ agreed to.

As soon as the order of the day was read for their Lordships to be summoned, Earl Bdthiirjl [ Lord Presiderit of the Council } rofe, and said, he should not have prefumed to have troubled the House to be summoned for that day, were he not deiirous of calling their attention to a subject of very singular importance. In the debate which had taken place on the •preceding Friday, he observed, a right reverend Prelate, [ Bishop of St. David’s ] whiofe candour could only be equalled by h ' s abilities, fiated ' a queflion that merited the most fericus consideration of the House, viz. whether the autho - rif. ng of commutation of land for tythes in an ir. closure bill, was or was not a measure berfeficial to the diergy, and whether it would be consistent with justice and found policy to continue this system of commutation or an equivalent in land in lieu of tythes, which the learned Prelate observed was but of modern invention, and had been only introduced since inclosure bills had become so very frequent. This question their Lordships in general he doubted not, would perceive to be a qtjeftion of great riiagnitude, aild to involve in it consequences of the deepest and most interesting kind.. Another right reverend Prelate [ Bishop of Peterborough ] who spoke second in the debate had declared himself of a contrary opinion; and contended that tythes in kind might be well commuted for land nr money, agreeably to existing circumstances, and and opposed reasonings of considerable force to the arguments of his learned brother; furejy then their Lordships would agree with him, that the question if upon no other Account, deserved their utmost attention. Several other noble Lords avowed ftmijar sentiments to those avowed by the two learned Prelates. The question so far as it was before the House, or could be faifly eonfideredj underwent a very full and detaileddif - cuflion, and the result of what passed on that occasioh was yet recent in ' their Lordships recolle&ion. It terminated in favour of an equivalent in land by the opinion of a very - deciftve majority. In the ' course of the debate, it was true, many things foreign to the - point, b ' utimmediatelycort - ne&ed with the bill then under consideration, had arisen, and the whole of the debate had taken so different a turn, that 1 fight

D E B A f t

fight wastoft ofth ’ e noble Prelate’s question altogether and the arguments of the day were brought to a conclusion upon very different grounds; it was in order therefore to bring their Lordships back to the discussion of that question that he had taken the liberty of moving to have their Lordships fumriion - ed. The mode, that with the leaVe of the House hfe would pursue, should be to move for a committee of the whole House on Wednesday next, if agreeable to their Lordships ^ to take the subje£t into consideratiom In ' that committee he meant to offer, a set of propositions lh the form of resolutions, the tendency of which he would open tp the Housef The first resolution yeas in purport *

“ that it is the opinion of this House, that inclosures of commons, wafte lands, forests, and open fields, are highly beneficial to the kingdom. ” His Lordship went into a hif - torjrof inclosing commons, wafte lands, Sic. shewing that in the reign of Henry VIII. and of his successor Elizabeth, there was a prevailing idea that they were detrimental, and a variety of ftatiites were made to forbid them Iri the reign of James II. however, men began to change their opinions, and the question assumed a new ’ face. Since that period, the advantage of inclosing commons, wafte lands, and open fields, had become gradually more and more obvious, and so fully had prevailed with the legislature that within the last thirty or forty yfears, nearly nine hundred inclosure bills had passed both Houses. of Parliament and received the loyal assent. He farther laid, that he had particularly inserted the word forest in his propbfitbn, because he was convinced that great good would accrue if mord of the forests of England were cleared ’ and inclosed and in this part of his speech he paid some ' handfome compliments to a noble Marquis, a member of ' that House, [ RockinghamJ for the pains he had taken in getting two different bills passed for the inclosing forests Concluding1, that ificlosure bills in genera mahifeftly tended ’ to the ' benefit of agriculture *, tillage, and husbandry; to the emplbyment of the industriousj to the decrease of the pooris - rates f arid to the general wealth of the kingdom.

This he Begged leave to allure their Lordships Was not an afiertion founded in theory or speculation, or from evefr local experience, or particular or peculiar circuttistances but wa ^ supported by so general a ft ream of evidence that he could venture to appeal to : every noble Lord Who heard him, but who might differ with him as to ' the ' point of eventual policy Vol, L H h

, P A EL I - A M E : K TAR ? A. 1781.

or expediencyj whether they had not in their respe&ire. neighbourhoods been eye - witnesses of the great benefits derived from inclosure bills.

He next proceeded, to state his second refolutlon, the fub - stance of which was, - c that it is the opinion of this House, that commuting of tyth. es in certain cases of inclosure, where, it can be done with. justice, for an adequate compensation of corn or land, is a measure equally beneficial to the clergy and the landholder, and ought to be encouraged by the le - giflature. ” - This proportion, he said, was meant to have a retrofpe£five as well as a prospective view; for, as so much; property had been already assessed under this species of tenure, jt would operate in a two - fold, manner : it would tend to quiet the minds of those who already held pofitlfions under, the faith of Parliament, no matter whether clergy or laity, and encourage the proprietors of lands not divided, to apply to Parliament in time to pome. He quoted a part of Speed ’ s, Chronicle, in which a conversation is related, and declared t - o have passed between William the Conqueror and a certain rich Abbot. William, tracing the ufage up to the most remote and ancient times, and maintaining it upon several historical proofs particularly stated. Among others, William put it as a question to the Abbot, how it happened that he conquered the whole kingdom by a single battle, when the Danes had, fought so many, and were not able to effect a conquest ? the Abbot replied, that when William landed, the kingdom was, in a very different state and condition from that in which it flood when the Danes invaded it, and made their efforts to subdue ir, the churches having swallowed up so much of the posselfions and wealth of the kingdom, that it was the interest of the subjedf to prefer a religious life; this operated as fq strong an inducement, that great numbers went into; the mo - nafteries,. priories, and other ecclesiastical institutions, and fought the preferments to which the religious were alone eji ? jgible, that there were ' not martial men enough remaining to make up an army sufficiently powerful to repel an invader or jguard the kingdom. William, as Speed states, profited by this answer, and in order tb enable himself to collect forces enough to avert the danger of invafion, and prelerve the coasts from. all attacks of a foreign, foe, as well as to maini tain peace and good government internally, proceeded to ft rip the religious, and particularly ', the Abbot he had questioned, of a considerable part of their posselfions, and to abolilfi and curtail such of the religious institutions as were leaft ufefuf,

' 1 ‘ 4 His

i7Bi. 7 D E B : A T E S. \

His Lbrdfhjp next proceeded to shew that till; the Reformation the clergy taxed themselves, and the means by which that mode was. altered, he believed, few of their Lbrdships were particularly acquainted with. The change was effected in this manner, not by ail act of Parliament, a refolutibn of either House, nor even by any royal proclamation,. But solely ' owed its origin to a written agreement, the record of which < he - had seen; it was signed by no other persons but the Lord - Chancellor and the Archbishop of Canterbury, early after the •Reftoration, ’ who were, in fabt, the only con tracing partied to the ' agreement by which the parliament, the clergy, and the nation had bound themselves by a tacit consent or silent acquiescence. The tenor /of the agreement was, that the clergy should give up the right of taxing themselves, provided th, eyr were allowed to vote for members of parliament, and by that means1 have a ihare in electing the representatives of the people, who were entrusted with the power of taxing the kingdom at large; Under the authority of this agreement ^ hefaid, the clergy had for so many years paid taxes equally wj ' th every other description of his Majesty’s subjects.

' His Lqrship’s third proposition was in substance, < C; that it might be expedient to give a compensation in land, money, or porn,; where tythes were : already usually taken in kind, or where no composition ex ^ fl : ed ., This he observed, would only operate in ' - ' cafei - wher - e the parties interested were equal - ly - well inclined to - come to such agreement, and would of course be ' entirely optional, and calculated merely to pave the way, to prbcure a good underftahdirig between the pallor and his flock, which he trusted Would promote the mutual inter rest of both, and a friendly correspondence between them.

last proposition, he Said, would be introdu&ory to a bill. It had been objected by the learned Prelate who made the motion on Friday, to commutations in land, that the clergyman, thus; transformed into a land - owner, would be. subje&ed - to many inconveniencies, if not liable to great lofles ^ that those who already had accepted of commutations in land were Seduced - in - the first instance by the lord of the manor, onfom. e considerable land - holder, by an immediate advantage ^ to agree to accept 6f ' an increased revenue} that in some in -, fiances th e rent agreed for was badly paid; in others, that those agreements originated in collusion; the clergyman in poflfeflion, being Secured an increase of his annual income during his life or ^ incumbency, - in prejudice to his successor, ' who, eorrir ing to Hand in his Shoes, would find himSeif neceflarily obligato njakb a choice of some one or other of the following in ' i - H h z convenieiicis - s

PAUL I AM E - N TAR Y A. itfi,

Gonveniencies. IJe would, if that were - the case, be obliged to agree to the rent accepted of by his predecefior, or. if the bargain. was a collusive one, he would be obliged to take whatever rent might bp offered, perhaps not more than two thirds or half of what had. been agreed to be given for the re ^ toror vicar’s part, before the inclosure. bill was passed into a law. :, or laftly, he would be neceflitated to take it into his o. wn hands, without any ability to cultivate or draw from it any benefit whatever .; The fences might be levelled or broken down .; the barns or other erections gone to ruin; and instan - ces might happen, said the learned Prelate, iimilar to one which had come to his knowledge, where the clergyman had b. ben prefen ted and induced, but sooner than accept of what xvo. ul. d have proved to him rather a di fad vantage than pro ? ht, the living and the duties annexed tp the actcual possession of it had been abandoned; in confeqifepce; of which, the portion of land set out for the clergyman; had lain neglected and disowned, and divine service had been discontinued within the particular parish alluded to.. ^ h el earned Prelate had not confined himself to a particular instance of Friday, but argued the point as applying, to the; probable grievance resulting from leases for the term of twe. otyrone years, ' which had been authorised in all inclosing bills passed of late, years; by a speciai clause, in which as he had. just observed, dilapidations, pretended. compositions, insolvent tenants, fkc. would be among the leading evils whereby the succeslqr would be left without relief and without remedy. T. hefe certainly were considerations worthy the serious attention of their Lordships - and he could not but. confess himself much indebted to the righ£; reverend Prelate for suggesting them; In order however to guard as much as the nature of the case would permit, againli these evils, he proposed to prepare d bill that vyould. - operate. as a preventative; - but as the matter he was peYfe&ly, aware, required. great nicey and great caution, vvas to bring in such a bill as he had men *

tioned, and proceed with it so far, as to haVe. it printed, and then jet it remain - of the table till the next session, that every one of their Lprdships might have full, time to digest. his thoughts upon it; to place it in every point of view; and to be able, when the subjeif should be resumed in the next session of Parliament ^ to speak his opinion, upon it decidedly, and without. reserve. With regard to the re. fplutions which he had {fated so their Lordships, his intention was, if the Ifoqfe ( when in a committee, and when the topics the refo « jutiqns turned on ? respe&iydy, had been. properly weighed

D E : B A T ' : E ' JS. ' 23,

gni |, jdircuJ ^ 4 ) /Bipuld agree - with. him, that the refolutiops were founded.. onfa&s,; and were, wife, politic, and expedient, ' to mpy. ejj ^ b. at that ^ thpfpt. rfefolptions - be - - vqted; but he ihopld ' no; t triple of bringing i. n - the report - to the House till after the hqjjdgys, that ^ heir Lordships might rhave time, to prepare for their. rpcqpnderat ^ p.. '.

: Before he : faf dpwn ^ hp ( - yvau{d : just say a yppi ' d or two - in anfw. er to ^ qp ^ jq ^ ipn ! be ^ n taken t. Q the mode. of cpmgmtingtythes ' for - lpijd, ' for, jth ? right reverend Prelate to whom,; ii be jc ^ #&fe. of his Ipeeph, he had Corpften alluded.

£h ? rle ^ rpe4 ^ r ^ l. ^ : fta |; ed7 rth ^ t the practice. of /commuting tythes - for land - tended. to bgingjland into mortmain, - and as land in mortrpain was nju&h mofevinconyentent - in : a commercial country than tythesin; mortmain, the right - reverend Prelate ohfer. vqd, that the : pr ^ ce/having pbyiopfly such a tendency, : wap - one reafqn - ^ p ^ oQg - ixiany why; pyr : vanceftpi}s fought t - ytfhjgg ] the best; and jprogei - efl : maintenanpe for ecclesir jastical. persons, :;. typsshi ? duty to observe, :; w, ere very -

apt to catch pt - particular,; iyords. and phrafes 3thati had; beep used to create aJfrong im. prelppn, and had ^ at; one, time or, other been pppt ^ larifrpm their ^ gnifyitjg fpmethitng; whiph might or might pot; have; be. en the fpprperpf; great, advantage, to the Jcingdpm. XMpr, ttpgtn\ ^ a ^ sphi > ^ % - J9 ^ : idefcriqtion ., £he

true - import : < of; - yY. hi ^ - fheJiis hprdfhjp '; thep : /gaye; anr. % GC5 > utvt/9fMt % etymology *; gpd shew. ed thenaturprC ^ f [ its; appjication;. - : iXhe : term. he idqplayed. ^ as vfirft used,. a % apglipable - : tp thpfeol ^ nhfr - which yf$PP; fo~h. ? ldy,. P5. to bear OUt - the - feo ^ p. f theirh. eitjg ^ ip. mai/n. T mort

{in ade; ad rand ) -. - hgcayfh. hqldejs of thern - - were pot obliged to fendioytdcpight&tp - Joiijjrr % f |. ritV > emilitary {pryice; of the kingdp. m jrgnif; idays lands ' : in general were

held by JXQcftthgj : tpnujre - itbaij, thpfe of fuitVa. ' pdlPervice; but would apy fipa ^ /py,; that lapd ^ yyerpheld by the‘fame tenure now ? cejt. ainly they \yefe pqf aj > d thereforejthe - whole of the argument - ^. put - mprtmain fell. to ^ he ground; and the reason was - this, as; iands held in mortmain v ? erp free from every ‘ species of - feudal feryicp, wfoj |. £ t&rt '; service - £pnunjued,. when a tax uppn hand, was. Inftjtut&d in its {lead,; jarid. the - clergy by their repyefentatives ir » pathacpent began to taxthemselves, the obje£lip > s; against that ' spepies of tenure from that mo - pientjceafpd to exist, with the; cause which gave it birth. i. fdis iL, prd, £hip,. in the co. urf ?,; P. f his speech, tQQk notice of Various. other matters ' tb. at hf ^ ' dccuri - qd in Fridays’s debate,

£nd whrch .; yvere applicable; ’. to the question he, w. ished the {loufe to - go into a cpmohitee upon. He particularly advert - ' ' ‘ ‘ ‘ - ed

P - A K LI A M tf N T A k Y. A. 1781,

ed to what had fallen from another learned Ptelate [ Biflibp of LanddfFj who spoke on a former occasion, relative to a substitutibn of ' corn - rent in ‘lieu ’ bf tythes1, should the Hatift determine td ahhiHilate them in future ’ bills ! of iriclosure and said, that confidefationV and an infinity of others would naturally suggest themselves ^ : and‘ would become the : proper. topics of disc ’ tifilon, ‘when the house wereVinJcommittee as he ' had proposed. He ' also begged their vi/otdships to take ' notice, - that he had not drawn up his fec6nd ? resolution in such terms - as - to make it extend to an. universarAbolition of tythes upon inclosures, but merely in certain1 eatesy where a compensat ro h ’ cou 1 d with justice be made to the minister; arid and he particularly wifhedy that1 the House would not once entertain a thought, that ' his ideas loofely and generally as he had thrown - them out, were founded on the : impft distant intention to ' ' abridge the parochial ’ clergy of their natural rights; "oti the contrary, he flattered himself that, broth clergy and laity would be materially benefited should the ' bropositions he had suggested be adoptedyfor nothing could be ’ more contrary - to ? o His - wiflids ' thah1; " to prejudice - "the - Church and the - mipifters ofj - ft; ! ' ah ' d he thought dnce; more necessary tb - ^ rike "htmfelf - flnderstood - ' Qn the subjecly jwbich was not ^ pointed excl ufiv edy ‘Ypl corripen fati oris : i n land, "£veri : in inclosure ^ iillsy much - lets in ^ ii any others - butwa ^ To; by va - Vied according to local and othercrfcumftrances. : - - ' The - leam - ed PrelatV ’ Who first moved‘in this biifinefs, had dfcated ari in - fbance. vfrhere ' la ct > rn - rent had ‘been fubstituted foe a compen - fa tion : i n lab ' dr at the express desire. of a most reverend Prelate some time - deCe&fed, £ the" late ^ ArchbishopU. bP - ^ V ' Cffk ], He turned To th ^ feC ' brdy afidyfbifnd the fa& to have1 •been faiths fully and - ChgreCbiy stated, '; and the provisions of1 - the bill ably and acctifately ^ dtawn up; - bub whether the Compensation or equivaleairJvas JgfVen in land ' of money; or incbrri - rent, would he in hfs - Opinion of very little cqnfequence, provided it was a fair : arid equitable one. Calculated to defeat the possible or probable abfifes pointed otithy the learned Prelate; - namely, the preA/erifing : any injustice being done to the; incumben. s for the tirne : being; the defeating or dimifiifliingp the estate hisducceflor Would be otherwise intitled 1 to ' or ' the stripping the church of her just rights and constitutional patrimony. He would just beg leave to add a Angle observation before heifat downy which was, his motion for leave to bring in a bill had this object and this only; that of : the framing the fkeletpn of a bill after the holidays, which he meant should go no farther for - the prefen tfefljbivj but ? by being printed w h$ir

A. 1781. © E > B : A ' .; TF T£ Si : a 7 239.

jtheir Lordships would havethe - whole recefs tq examine the, Iprineipley; andfully. revolve, ‘the subject, in < their - minds; so that early r; iii the :; h; ext winter, they; would• be fully enabled

| to give a d. epided,. opinion upon ' its policy or inexpediency.,

| With thisvintentipq. only. he rhad prefumed to trouble ! theiy L. ordlhjps upon [ a subject of fuqh vaft, importance; and upon [ this : view, pfdt, he. trusted to; th£ir Lordships candour ;, if the jsubject fhotild be deemed at : ^, worthy of future dicuflion or deliberation,, he Was ' intitled to ibme degree of favourable. attention. '; -.. : - •,, -

He begged their Lordships pardon for troubling them so long; thanked them for their unmerited indulgence; and

concluded with moving his first proposition,

The Bishop; of : JLandaff ^ : \after - - pgying several handlomeBiffiop of compliments - rto :; th& : abilities. - and candour of the noble EarlLw ^ who fpokelaft,; and testifying the, full conviction wh ich imprinted itfelfron - : his mind, of, the,;. purity of his Lordship’s motives, proceeded : to describe the vaft magnitude of the questi. on when combined with,; ts various relations, and pro - babiej [ if not - certain consequences; and farther observing, that the proportions hung out by the noble Earl would, in his his opinionj lead to matters no lefs novel than dangerous that of; modelling the whole iyftem of tythe - laws, as they had now, remained for ages; an intended innovation, in Jbi& apprehension, of the most. alarming nature; a proppfition, which would, not merely. operate upon a particular : subject or species of property, ? bujt which would, extend itfelf to the whole tytheable, property of the kingdom.

, The noble ., Earl’s first proportion wa *, he, apprehended founded; in error in point of fact as well - as in, jtheory. The noble Earl laid It down as a kind; of truifm, or proppfition, in jts terms commanding universal aifent as jfoon as made known; “that it would be of - general benefit and utility to enclose. fofefts, waftes, common and commonable lands, ” &c *

This was the - first. proppfition the noble Earl proposed to assemble their Xo. rdships tp discuss and vote on Wednesday next. He thought it his duty to dilfent from, and deny the university of that, proposition, and at the fame time, and in this stage of the business, to add his reasons.. L - ’ He endeavoured, to inform himself upon the subje£f » and had learned, [ that the principle; of enclofingall lands, within the delpription. -. stated,. admitted of : many particular if not general, exceptions ^ - Itl; - corn grounds, it had been proved, independent of the ' great ’ wafte of land and expence of en -

closing.

H < 3

V A R ' L - f A gf E ' N f Ar R V ' A. 17S1, '

clbfing, that ericlosures - Were unfavourable t : 6 : l agriculture, and to the cultivation or pfbytide bf corn.. Thecrops were subject to blights and mildews, ' fromrthe shade of the neighbouring trees" arid ' hedges which ' obstru€ted the passage of the air, while it : excluded the fun ^ arid of course threw a shade which was extremely unfavourable to the ripening of the cbfri. Trees hedges, and fhirubs, were besides apt togene - rate ' vernfiri and ' mariybther evils of aflmilar nature, which proved extremely destru&ivri; whereas in op&i fields, the corn was free from those evils, and the farmer or grower always found it to be bf a "better; arid superior quality, arid encreased in quantity as wellas1 in goodness '. If this should prove, to be the case, as he made ' no ' doubt : it ? Would upon a full and mature enquiry, when called ripqib tb vote an abstract question, directly contrary to what he believed to bfi; true, he thought it best tb cqirimunicate his feritiments thus ’ early, rather than by ’ giving ' his assent in this stage of the hufinefs, seem to approve of thkt ' which for the peaforis now flated he - previbufly n ^ arif to bppoffe. -

His Lordship dwelt particularly the danger of fhak - ing ancient foundations ^ arid removing ancient land - marks, which had flood the teft of ' ages, and which he believed could not be changed tb any real ' advantage - or benefit, but ' might in the ' end lead to irijustice, or to the utter fubverlioh ' of the5 ecclesiastical eflabi ' ifhriient of ' the - kingdbrii, and of co ’ urfe, as forriiirig a part ^ arid - ' a - vefy ’ pOrisiderable part, deeply affe£t arid‘ endanger thdconftitution itfelfi : Befides the general argument, he appealed to every noble Lord who ' heard hirii,. who hadf paid theipafl ' - ' aftention to - agriculture or to the irripfovement - of ' lands - whether ^ there - was any one iribde of cultivation ‘respdftfrig - ' ‘arable - ' or ’ gtafir lands which could be apj31iefl : with success ' fb every ' kind - ' bf Toll, to every species of property, or every mbdificat ' ibri of right. He was perfuaded Hi mfelf of the con tt ary•$ they differed - irifririfically1 and extfinfically. In some iriflaribbsdQcal prejudices ' would prevail, cu ' ftbrii would govern - in bthbfs, arid temper and dispofitibri in m any ’ morei Whht ' XvbrilH bd Of infinite benefit in one place would prove inifbhthV ^ h ^ ih ^ rio ' thbr; and what, would be accepted - ' of with infinite - satisfadtibhi by the inhabitants in one parish would perhaps - be execrated in a neighbouring one, and cause those animdfitiesWd; incurable disagreements between the paftor and his flock which it was the profeft iriterition - bf the preferit refolutibns tb remove j ahd con -

’. fe ^ ueritl/ §

241

A. 1781. DEB A T - E S.

ly - instead of prompting peace and union between the clergyman and his congregation, they, would, if agreed to, create endless eontefts, litigations, and disputes.

He was perfe£lly convinced of the noble Earl ’ s; commendable zeal, and if he was as certain of the praftibility of carrying his general plan, of an equitable and fair cortfpen - fation into execution, as he was of the motives which gave birth to it, he should be much readier to become a convert - to his Lordftlip’s arguments; but he had very droiig reasons todoubr, that a£is would be resorted to which would - entirely defeat his Lbrdship’s good intentions, and there was an instance dated by his right reverend friend, who moved for the committee on Friday [ Bishop of St. David’s J which he mull consider as - true in all its parts, because he had not beard if controveted or disputed, lie meant that of > the portion carved out by the incumbent, being abandoned by his succesl ' or, and divine service in consequence. thereof discontinued. He was satisfied of the abilities and zeal of, the noble Earl, but dill he was fearful of experiment ', and that art, chicane, and fraud, in the various lhapes it might afifume, would triumph over the bed intentions, aided by the bed abilities, when by a collusive agreement between the incumbent for the time being, or by the arts and management of the lord of the manor, the freeholders, and other parishioners, the eventual intered of the next incumbent might be materially injured or nearly annihilated; when at the fame time, it would, in his opinion, be morally mipodible to create any power of a superintending or controuling nature adequate to prevent the injustice or abuie in its origin, or remove or correct it after it had been perpetrated or permitted.

After urging several other arguments against the first proportion, he animadverted, upon each of the following ones, in the course of which he made many pointed animadversions, equally tending to demondrate the politive evils which mud arise upon adopting the principle of commutation in general ^ and the inadequacy of any mode of prevention which might be adopted, ludicient to defeat or corre£f the evils which mud naturally result from a iyftem which wquld hold out temptations : too strong to bejefided, and means of gratifying them he feared, beyond the power of legal detection.

He should be lorry to obtrudp his opinions on their Lord - ships, while there were so many noble sperfons so much more able and fitter for the talk; but - he declared he. could not in conscience remain Ijlent, nor abilaip, epavinced as he was, Vol. I. I i of

24 *

The Lc ’ d Gbantel. ’ o *.

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1784,

of the solidity of Ills objections, from imparting them to the House. He thought - it his duty to declare once more before he fat down, that he trembled for. the consequehces of cotfling to ah hafty or precipitate vote upon a matter of such singular consequence; and concluded with reminding the noble Earl, that though the resolutions should be voted, they wofllcl Hill require the fan < ftion of an act of Parliament to give them operation. He vviflied besides to remind the lparned anti noble Lord, that although a bill or bills agreeably tb the re - solutions propoled by his Lord Hi ip to - > e voted on Wednesilay next, should pals that House, before the fame could be paired into a law, they must obtain thp alien t of the other branch of the legislature. Upon the whole, taking into consideration the vaft extent of the question, the great, variety of objects which it embraced, the advanced period of the leftion, the thin attendances which usually happen after the Easter rccels, he would recommenc} to the noble Earl, to poftpone the farther consideration of the propoled business till next leftion; otherwise, for the reasons he had prefumed to urge ^ he lliould find himself obliged to give a negative to the motion, for the House resolving itfelf into a committee, for the purpose of taking into consideration the relolutions propoled to be - submitted to that committe on Wednel ' day next.

The Lord Chancellory as usual upon such occasions, quitted thewoqllack and came to his place at the head of the Dukes bench. He began with oblerving, that as a member of that House, he stood in a very disagreeable predicament, and was much embar raffed; because, before he could with propriety enter into the consideration of the question, he found it ne ^ ceiTary tb remove foipe general imprefiions, and comment upon l ' ome circumstances which he believed had been mil - apprehended or miftated by those who thought fit to differ from him on a former day.

He had been described as a person actuated by childiHi piotivcs, and acting undep filly and absurd prejudices; that, full of zeal for the interests of the church, he had miffed his way in the piaineft road; and - pourilhed ideas so contrary, wild, idle, and absurd, that while his wish and profef - lions were avowedly to maintain the rights of the clergy on their true bails, he was so blinded; and rivetted to his own child - - ifh. opinions, that what he wished to obtain as an advocate, he defeated by the folly and abfurdiiy of the mode, stile, and manner, he adopted in the pursuit of it. When persons of great rack, and ftiU greater abilities; when persons who

A. i, Si. D E £ \ f E. S.

Ibad filled the most important offices ih the state; and whose private virtues great talents, and approved experience, adopted such a language he confessed he felt much on the o ' cca - fion; because with the load of folly that was imputed to him, •and perhaps very juftty, another species of accusation was implied for which he could plcad. no apology; namely, an incurable obstinacy, originating in inveterate prejudices, and a froward resistance to the just and indifputable claims of so much public and private virtue ! yet, however weak and ehildifh his conduct had appeared to those who thought it worth their while to so represent it it formed no part of the present question. The charge as a general one, might be well founded; but although hd was ready to submit to the great authority he alluded. to, it Was his duty to observe how far the general censure was aptly and juftly applied in the instance which gave birth to the observation.

It was faicl he was full of zeal for the church. He was so; but his ' Zeal was not partial, or confined to the church, farther than it was conne£Ved with the other great national establifhments, of which it formed a part, and no incon - considerable one. There were many things, perhaps, in which he would not go as great lengths as some persons might; there were others, in which perhaps he would go farther. He did not mean however to assume any. peculiar merit, to himself, merely on account, of that circumstance. He ^ did not mean to infinuate, that because he differed in opinion from both parties, that therefore, he was right. The middle path which he had struck. out to himself, was taken from choice, not, he trusted, from any premeditated prejudices; and whether he was or was not miftaken, he could fairly say, that he had not been influenced by the opiniops of others; what he thought on the subject proceeded merely from the suggestions of his own mind, assisted by that degree of attention which his other avocations and duties permitted him to give it; sand what had struck him as. just, wife, equitable, and expedient. For instance, some of their Lordships might think that a compensation in lieu of tythes ought not be given or accepted of in any given case; and others, that it would be proper to give or accept of a compensation in every given case; opinions ' widely opposite to each other.. He was, for his - part, equally averse to both, extremes. He could fra me - in his own mind an infinite variety of cases, in which the claims of the patron, re&or, or vicar, might be fairly, equitably, and he would add bene -

Ii. 2 ficially

44 PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

ficially for both parties, be commuted for compensatfons in ' LhJ, money, or a corn - rent; and on the other hand, perhaps, as many in which such a commutation would be every way ’ inexpedient ^ inequitable, inadequate, and unjuft. Nay, he he would venture a step farther than what in argument had been yet suggested on either fide of the House. He could conceive peculiar circumstances in respe& of property, which being so blended together, and the interest as well as foil so intermixed, as to render it perfectly justifiable and expedient, to divide and set out the common fields, &c. among the land - owners, withoutSrfy reference whatever to the claims of the lay - impropriator, patron, re£tor, or vicar, he meant as to the mode of carrying the fame into execution.

After laying before their Lordfiiips this genuine state of his mind, he trusted he should be intitled, upon. an avowal so fe - rious and solemn, that whatever his zeal or his childish zeal for the church might be, it would be acknowledged, it was not merely a blind zeal, nor totally destitute of method and principle, be the former however absurd or the latter however erroneous. He flattered hi - mfelf that even his wartrieft antagonists upon cooler reflexion would confess, that although a better method might be easily struck out, that his at leaft aimed at lyftem and uniformity; and though a better and founder principle might be established, yet nothing could be t fairly objected to it, on the ground of prejudice or partiality -; because, if for no other reason, it would feme times tend to operate for commutations, and at other against them; sometimes in favour of what had been imputed, to him as the effect of mere zeal; at other times equally inimical to that cause, which it was infinuated he had blindly embraced, and blindly as well as obftinarely adhered to \

It was urged, and perhaps with great justice, that the pro -; positions, hung out by the noble Earl, w. ere only objects of general difcullion, and proposed to be matter of future re - consideration. For his part, however true that might appear to the noble mover, he could not fee them in the fame, light. ! It struck him that they were precipitate, as had been well ' observed : by the learned Prelate who spoke lafty Their Lord ships were called upon—to do what ? to vote the refo - lutions first, and consider them afterwards. For his. part, he had been so ill informed, and so. filly to continue to think he had been rightly informed, that anxious : enquiry ^ clpfe and serious attention, and mature deliberation, ought, jo. precede a. fixed - determination - whether to adopt or reject; but, in the present instance, that stale maxim ' was nie ^ nt

to

1

A. 17. 81 DEBATES.

tobs exploded, and exactly the reverfe proposed to be fudftitu - fe I in its stead, If he might ‘be prefumed to have an interest or wiih either Way, he could with truth say; he had never heard a Angle syllable. or intimation of their contents, being; totally ignorant of their tendency, nay even of their txifience at all, before he heaid them from the noble Earl; yet he was not ashamed to confess, that they were in their nature so ex - tei - five, various, and complex, that not only at the instant he was speaking, but at the period proposed to bring them forward, he neither wU ' s, nor could be ready to give a decided and satisfactory opinion on their contents That, to be sure, might be his fault, not that of the noble Earl. His talents might be of a size and texture unequal to the talk. He might require time, great labour, and induflrry, to compre - hend and judge of what ' in itfelf was Ample and almost fel ’ f - evident. He might bedull ^ flow of comprehension, and every way unprepared to decide upon a subje < 5t, in which men of tounder abilkiis, of more geniu3, and greater penetration, would find themselves free and unembarrafled. The - noble Earl who presided at the head of his Majesty’s councils, with so much credit to himself, and so happily for the nation, as well as some other noble Lords, were very probably fully informed, and their minds everyway prepared to come to a vote. Why so ? because, by their superior talents they had made themselves perfectly matter of thesubje£l, and learned as much by a very ( hart and transient attention to it as; would call for much labour and induftry from others. Be that as it may, as a member of that House, and destitute of those gifts Which others possessed, he had a right to contend for a more full and ample consideration, otherwise he would find himself obliged to come to a vote upon a subje£f in which he, was not prepared to give one; while those, pofiefling the abilities he had been describing, not seeing the necefljty of a more, laborious difeuflion, would be perfectly at their ease, and fro m the sudden conviction prefling on their c > wn minds, would forbear to make those allowances which men of dull appre - hension, of tardy or imperfect conceptions, were ’ in candour entitled to; but which men of a contrary description, not feeling any such defe£l; in themselves, were often too apt to refuse. ‘.

After paying his compliments very handfomelyLto the noble Earl [ Sandwich ] whom he prefumed to have reprefeated him as a child, ( we believe without doors ) and to the noble Earl, whom he represented as presiding at the head of this Majesty’s councils with so much credit to himself, and so

happiky

PARLIAMENTARY A, iy » i.

happily for the nation, [ supposed. to mean Earl Bathurst ]; and after having endeavoured to describe himself as not quite so childifli, obftin ' ate, and partial, as, had been, so induilri - oufly propagated somewhere his Lordship proceeded to take a nearer view of the question.

He believed, he said, that it had been a general rule, as well in matters of policy as legislation, as - he Had already taken the liberty to observe to consider things fully and maturely previous to their ultimate adoption and when they were finally determined upop and digested, to lofe no time in carrying them into execution. He believed every noble Lord who heard him would subscribe to the soundness of this principle as a general one. He was, however, unfortunate enough to think, that the conduct of the noble Earl, in the present inflance, was directly the reverfe, and evidently fub - verfive of that principle. Their Lordships were now, he would not say for the first time, but he hoped for the last, called upon to decide first, and consider afterwards. They were called upon to vote a. firing of abstract propofiti - ons, which might apply to any case, or to no case; and wjien their Lordships had resolved them, they were left to hunt for particular occasions of making a fit application of them. In his poor underflanding, the more rational and regular mode, of proceeding would be to wait till the occasion occurred, and then apply the principle to the particular case, not as it wefe to create the particular case, merely to exercise the principle.

He was, he must confess, an enemy to innovations in general, particularly innovations brought forward a§ the present were, because he prefumed he had been so foolish to consider cufijoms and ufuages fanftipned by the approbation of ages, too sacred to be luddenly, he would not lay wantonly changed, upon an idea of reformation, or of making things better, which it was fair to affirm were well enough. It was the maxim of a eelebrateed politician, whose ch a rafter was sufficiently known to every noble Lord who ' heard him, [ Tupposed to mean Machiavel ] to endeavour to bring the constitution back to its first principles, and place it on its ancient, foundations, in order to restore it to its primitive purity; which, from the general course of human events, and the; never - failing, mutability which they generate, it had im - perceptably departed from. This it was whidh had frequently induced hini to endeavour tofhew the impropriety of making experiments upon mere theory, in order to render things. - i - ' •. better

p

1. iy8i, DEBATES, 247

letter which appeared at the time not to want mending; first, lecause experiments in respe£l of great national objects were n themselves dangerous : secondly, because the evil or mif - : hief should be first pointed out, even to create a pretence : or inaqvating. Such a cqnduft was in his apprehension the rery reverie of the prevailing opinion among modern states - nen; their endeavours seemed to direct the other way, not : o an adherence or a vyifh to recur to first principles, but to ieviate still farther from the original constitution, [ supposecl to allude to the Duke of Richmond, Mr. Burke, and fame atliers ], bjo man could fee to what the present proposed reT solutions pointed, or where they might end. He had often expressed himself very fully on the subject of innovation and experimental state of reformation in that House, and had as often been iupported and fortified in his arguments and opinions by a very able assistant, [ Lord Bathurst ] whose support lie knew he must want that day. The payment of tythes had existed for many ages; it had been handed clown to us from the eariieft periods of the constitution. ' Tythes had been universally rendered to the clergy, as their patrimony, by all Europe. They had ' existed under the Saxon government, and were acknowledged by internal content, lie believed long before even they had received the sanction of the legislature. The payment of tythes ftooci therefore upon the ir. oft ancient and liable foundations : tythes had been established by custom time immemorial, and had an authority as high, respeflable, and venerable as the constitution itfelfV His Lordship, after fixing the high antiquity of the ec - pleiiastical constitution of this country, proceeded to state Tome of the obvious inconveniencies which might result from the - introdu£lion of change and innovation. He ob - ierved, that in political contemplation the ecclesiastical polity had been at all times considered as one of the pillars of the constitution. He had no occasion, he prefumed, to refer to particulars. History afforded strong ^ nd undeniable propfs, at a period not very < far distant, how dangerous it was to attempt to alter or innovate. The religious establish - inent was attacked; and the attack proving iuccefsful, that pillar of the constitution having given way, it fhopk the rest, and nearly overturned the constitution itfelf, and that in such a manner as to render its re - establishment extremely difficult. " ' ' ■

For his part, he was averse to experiments of any kind, unlefsi. upon full and mature confederation. He had been

long

2. 4& PARLIAMENTARY, A ? 1781

long - enough in the world. tp be a witness to several attempts of the kind; and if he might safely conclude or judge from the consequences, he law nothing sufficient to induce him to make farther trials of a similar nature. The present age > I lie observec ], was fruitful in schemes. .;. every person who thought of one making no scruple of bringing it forward under the name of an improvement; but whenever they were. or should be offered to his consideration, either as a mem her - of the legislature or a statesman, he should always aft with great caution and much doubt; and that because whatever came so powerfully recommended to him as to have received the approbation of the ablest men in the most enlightened times, ought not, in his opinion, be changed, till after the fullest consideration, or upon motives of the 1110ft manifeft and urgent neceffity.

The noble Earl’s second proposition, which more particularly applied to the principle his. Lordship seemed desirous to establish, was so framed as to recommend to their Lordships to come; o a vote upon a question merely abstract. It vvas a deduction drawn from his first, which was not even attempted to be proved; and it recommended to give a compensation in lieu of tythes in certain instanees; —certain, here, evidently referred to something which was to be the rcfult of previous investigation and enquiry .; and therefore, in his nppreheniion, would amount to a declaration on the part of their Lordships, that something was fit to be done, of which no previous definition was pretended to be given. In certain cases, or in certain circumstances, some case or circumstance ought to be Rated or defined, in which it would be proper to aft in such or such a manner. JBefiore the case happened, or presented itfelf to their Lordships, it would be absurd to say what would, or could be fit to do; when it Ihonlcl or might happen, therefore, wa. - ., in his Qpinion, full time enough to determine whether it was a right or wrong measure.

The noble Earl said, that the principle, as he explained it, had been fully fan£tioned and acknowledged upon a former occasion; he meant the principle of commutation, of giving land in lieu of tythes. fie was. unwilling to refer to what passed in a former debate, and much more so to call any determination of their Lordships into question. or review : bur, under this r - efervation, he deemed hpnfelf at liberty to ob - ici ye upoja what had passed the la ft day.. The bill for en -

' ft. ' I7 » n I ) E SB : A ’ ’ : T ~E s. -

doling ' the; lands therein stated, rholl certainly met with their Lordships. concurrence; but he never understood that the principle, hs how brought forward by the noble Earl, had, or indeed, was properly at all under contemplation.

He begged their Lordlliips to ' refieff,. notwithstanding what had. been urged by the noble and learned Lord, respecting w - hat passed the last day concerning the determination of the House upon the motion of recommitment made by a ' learned prelate, that although their Lordships might trunk a particular principle proper to be adopted respefiing a par - ’ ticular private bill, - it by no/rnearis followed, that tire fame principle,. merely on the ground of prudence, was fit to be laid down in all cases as a general one, or to be adhered to in all cases that might occur; and though it might : not be decent in him to controvert the propriety of tliatkdecifioH, or cehfure the condufi of the House on"that occafiqn, he could never conceive '. ' tliif ’ Was thereby precluded, ’ - or so ' •$r ' bound as to acqUiejfce ' under, theT ex ten five application; of it, which the noble and learned Lord seemed defirou ^ to, make. / " _ -. ', ' ”1” - .,. ' " ' V; ‘

- If he recollected right, that bill ' ftpod upon its own particular bafisj an ' argument between ' the parties themselves, that on One; fide fucll a. compensation was offered, and - on the other that it Ava ' s accepted of When therefore he heard a ' rule laid down, which was to goverh ' m all cases, ' and heard, an instance adduced ^ ' in which that;. rule. was thpughLappli - ^ cable in a particular ' cafc, he con felled his total ' inability. to discover how particular instancescpUld be pleaded as an ex - ' ample on whichv tPVbuild /a jgeherarjujtei. t It might be per - f ^ ftdy right to commute upon some pccafipns '; it might ohv others be eiqually - improper; blit - if their Lordships agreed tp vote the abftray ^ qupftion proposed byJhe noble Earl, their Hands would be. tied upinfuch a mafiner as to exclude all.. choice.. / r ’ *. .. " ‘

' But if he disapproved of the matter, ' he no lefs dilapproved of the manner in ‘which the noble. Lord had brought this question forward. —; at the eve of a recefs. He should think it. ' improper, perhaps at any time ^ much more now. But in what lb ape dict. it come recommended to their Lordships ? In the first inflance, as so many {landing orders to be entered and recorded upon their Lordships Journals; and as to the bill, in the shape of a law. By the former, their Lordships were precluded from entering into the ^ propriety or impropriety of any bill which came within the terms of Vojt. 1. KJk. 1 the -

PARLIAMENT ARY i$8i,

the ft anting orders ;, by ' the latter, their Lordships Undertook to bind the other branch of the legislature ih. all poflible cases. How decent or fit that might be, he should not pretend to determine but this he was willing and ready to prove, thattfu. ch a law, '. even in respeift to their Lordships the ' mselves would be idle and ' nugatory, as it declared in its principle not merely an act or law for the time, but was manifeftly intended to bind their. Lordships, as well as the other House,. which Co. far as it was profefiedly meant to operate, amounted to a perpetual law, '

His Lprdship, after ! treating this subject in amoil masterly manner, pointed out a great number of other ir\convenien « ies which might "arife upon die ' general principle of the noble £arl’s proppled resolutions.. ' Among others he controverted the allotment ., or portion carved out or. meant to be - carved put for - ithe rediorj vicar, or lay impropriator. In many jnstances the eighth, he contended, ’ was not a fair equivalent. ift land; and if1 the general commutation of land, instead of - tythe, were .; to, take place, he doubted much that he would have a very able and probably a decisive support.. in.. that;. House, r If -, the reformation was. to be general;. if ' all. tythewasto. be commuted for land, or any bthpr equivalent ^ he had good reason, to believe that many : who heard him,. who were not adverse to the voting of an abftr; a£j !; questibh might probably adopt ' another mode and stile of ' thinking on the subje£t and he, would tell his rea - fbn,. : Though they might : not feel that, chtldifh partiality and prejudice for the interests of the church that was imputed to him, they would, polfibly. feel other sentiments which might immediately point out to them the necessary protection of their own property, Several of the noble Lords that ' heard, him who, were the proprietors, of lay impropriations, jf the commutation was to be a. general one would foonlearn that an eighth would neither be a fair nor equitable equivalent -;. they jwould perceive that what they were to receive would ^ prove - inadequate; consequently his fears for the clergy, if he Had entertained any, would soon cease, being tolerably confident when, their Lordfiftps, he meant such as were lay improprietors, understood that their interests andp roper ties would beaffe < ftedas wellasthofe of the cler -.

fy by this newplan of jndilenminate commutation, they e made no doubt would not be lo unmindful of themselves a. s to negle ^, / upop. every future - occasion which might strife, to take every ^ proper and heceiTary means in their ppwer as members of the legislature, - that the compenfa - '

• - ' ', tios

A. iVsil W £ a ¥ ' fe ’ §/

tion; they ' receive was an adequate oniSj/iafid such as, ’ without Jany diminution dfthe interest ' they were abbut to part With, rriigjht be deemed a safe krt& e ^ uitabl0. e ^ biyile ' nt :. FrOrri /this fjbn&arjk his Lordship proceed ed to itatfc the com - penfation‘ jpjsr ., 4 ^. ’ ifl - ffioney, paid ' for the great ty thes in j ^ i ^ - tfordmiVe ^ /‘Ijhtopftiirej and Wiltshire, in each of Which

he said j ( if we recollected right Sii - h6 could, from his own knowledge, speaicu ^ oh ' the subject. He contended from this, that if the resolution was adopted, the clergy would suffer considerably; and elucidated ' his alfertion in the following manner s He suppbfedj th ’ at ' the native value of land Was ib much, that this, land, in a - state of cultivation, was worth ' so much mpre He begged to elucidate what he meant to suppose, that it would let at ten or twenty shillings an. acre, and when under corn it. was worth ten times that sum; lie would submit to their Lordships, whether a seventh. or eighth of the - land, or a rent equal to the seventh or eighth of the land, would be an adequate compensation to the patron,. incumbent, or lay - " impropriator; no, nor he believed a. 1 fifth, because tyfhe im - ported not a tenth, an eighth, or a seventh of the intrinfic Value of the land, agreeably to the ' rent reserved, but a tenth of it when in a state of the highest cultivation anid improvement. His Lordship stated an infinite number ' of bther arf ' guments, many of which bore. exceedingly Hard on the noble mover of the question. In particular hefaid, it was hot very usual in one noble Lord to wrest a subje£t out of the hands of another, who had givenmotice, that he intended to bring the mhtter before their Lordships.. A noble Earl had, as their Lordships would be pleased to recollect, given notice on Friday, that he meant to prepare tome propofitio. ns, which. When he had properly, matured, he Had declared hq should submit to their confidefationj why then was another rioble Lord, merely from feeling his own mind more ready, ahd his ideas quicker upon the subject, to foreftaLthe noble Earl > Was it from a consciousness of greater wifdom, greater knowledge, or a rooted con vision that the ideas he had formed were the only good ideas that could be collected, on the fub - je£t, and the : only ones that were fit for their Lordships countenance ? By saying this, he begged not to be finder - flood as meaning to infinuate thatliis Majesty’s councils were not as wifely presided over as ever they had been. at any time whatever; he only meant to obfe ^ ve, that there. wis. no rea - foix for their Lordships to be Suddenly called on to decide Vtp -

P A R LI AM ENTA ' Rf ? A, 178 *,

on. tysubje, & in five days fniye, which they. vyerp to be ajbvv - r ccf 4, much longer time to thinksbetter ' of ., ' : HisjLofdship ] place/d. '.. the question in many ' different points of view, and asked 1 n. wKat mannerwere the defoliations ^ tp ^ ' be carried into execution ' ? If as orders of; the '. J [ 6u. fe‘, ( the ^ r ' Xp£ ^ APs ' idbuhtedlyVwere competent to make rpics. fpjr theTorm. of ttiei - r own ’ proceedings, in like manner; as ‘ the ’ 1 coujij ' t - sb _ ejto > ^ j ' ? iria ^ c rules for what were. calFed the stile ahd. pT ^ ce ' of1 the c > uft >

. but ' die dies riot conceive, the y were compefen ^ tOr. m ^ e ’ rules that. were to bind the whole kingdom. At rIengtii hiS ' Lbfdr Jliip. concluded with earnestly repeating hisintreatyj that the Koufe would not prccipitately. ‘. enter into at. matter. of so much importance. *. r 1 *,

Earl Bathurst ' replied, arid, complained. of having, been greatly, mifundie ' mpod. bj£ ' the : npbl. e and learned Lord. : No - tiiing, he iaid, could be farther from his intention than precipitancy; he had ' all through his lpeech expressly declared as much. With ' regard, to the argument, that it would be ir -

». - ' ) j ' O '; • if t.. J

regular for tlie‘committee to decide, and then‘for the House to reconsider upon the ' report, let their Lordfifips recoiled, that it was the rule of proceeding in every bilibrought into that House for the repeal of a law, by which. the religion or commerce of the kingdom might be affecied, or in feipeft to a proposition of any kind which would affect ancient, eftabjifli - : ments, or Which‘ieemed to be of peculiar ' consequence ’ and importance; it : was indeed the established ' mode of pro - ceechrfg;. Because it Would open a, door to a ful ler and freer difcuHidn. Their Lordships would ' in that; case be at liberty to weigh and ' examine thec pidpolition in allits ' parts and difr ferent relations; to hear objections to former arguments; tp point out how far" they had been answered ' or removed : la thort, it would be in a committee of t&e ^ whple '. Hqufe only, -. \yhere a subject of stich great extent, ahd embracing. such a variety of obje£fs, as it had been frequently well described in the course" of the debate, 5co. uld be fairly ' and fuificiehtly. clifcuffed and examined; whereas, ' if a proposition in the shape of a bill were ' made, and it were permitted ' to ' be brought to st second refading, the order of their ' Lordlhips1 proceeding ' s ' \wpul4 iidt admit ' ' of any1 niember rifing a second time", but to explain, and of course rii£ny. opportunities to examine the principle as well as provisiohs of a bill ^ ' would be denied in ' a debate in the House, which ra discussion in a committee ' amply afforded. As to the other point, respeit; ing the prefumed impropriety of reporting the bill the fame

. D E B A T E $. - 253

day it was committed, that, he prefumed to say, was perfectly ' regular; for if no amendment was made in a committee, a bill was reported the fame day; but if an amendment was made,. the bill was never reported till the next day,. and then the : House proceeded to reconsider it. He replied to several ' objections made by the noble apd learned Lord who spoke; ldft, ‘ hoping that their Lordships would not be milled, butWould. learn, ' to make the just distin&ion between faCts afrd aftertions, mifrepreferitations and‘ arguments, and laboured exertions of eloquence and found reasoning, leading to a cledr and indilputed conclusions. /

He was lorry, but so it happened, that the learned Pre -

late who rofe to answer him had totally mifunderstood him, and in fonie particulars had mif - stated his arguments .; and in this it was his fate to be peculiarly unfortunate, because he had taken uncommon paifls to obviate the objections which, he foresaw might b ' e. made to an hafty or premature decision, ujjon a subject every way so interesting and important. He begged leave to assure that noble Prelate, that it Was never his wish or intention to precipitate the business, or prefs their lordships to an ' hafty and sudden vote : he had, on the contrary, ' guarded his propoolitions with all possible caution; and, so far from propofing to hurry the bill through both Houses at so advanced a period of the session, that he had expressly stated, that his wish was to proceed with it to the stageof having it printed and then to let it lie on the table till the next session. Before his Lordship concluded, he said, he cared not whether the committee was deferred to that day - six weeks or that day fix months, so far was he from wish - ing to precipitaite the matter in point of time, that he was ~

perfectly regardlefs what manner their Lordships might think fit to dispose of the motion for the present, still resolving within ! himself the fixed resolution of bringing the question forward at a more convenient opportunity. '

The Biiliop of ' St. David ? s said, in his opinion, the fef - BHhop of fion was by much to far advanced to take the matter up at St - Da ’ ht » present He must confess, he had heard nothing sufficient to obviate those objections he had made on a former day to the principle of commutation; or rather had collected from the noble. Earl’s own mouth, fresh arguments against the passing such a bill. At the fam$ time, it was a respect due to the noble Earl, which no person would controvert, that the part he had acted claimed every poffibie degree of attention and reipcCt. In that point of view, although he was 1 • ’ 4 - ' ' ' ' not

54 P A : RLIAME&TAR Y A ' J ' ijtiU

hot now difpbfed ' to vote for going into a comrrilttee on the noble and learned Lord’s propositions; at a fitter time, and more convenient opportunity, lie would cheerfully enter into the business; and, as far as his very flender abilities ' might enable him, would meet the question fairly, and decide in j Favour of that fide which Teemed to him to heft promote general benefit, and to be best calculated at the fame time to protect the respective rights, claims, and properties of the parties cncerned.

Sari of ’ The Earl of - Coventry said, he retained his opinion deliver -

$ov entry, cd the last day he pad the honour to ' add refs their Lordships on the occasion, that c6mmutation of fythes for land would be ameasure of infinite benefit, and - prove equally advanta -, geous to the re£tor, lay - impropriator, the land - owner, and the farmer; nor had he heard a single objection stated that day, in the course of the debate, or upon the present occasion, of sufficient force or validity to alter it. Some objections respecting time and convenience had indeed been made that day, which might weigh against the noble : Earl’s motion for a committee on Wednesday next; but not one, that he had heard or attended to, which went against ' its principle and proposed objects. The time, he believed, was too short, as he understood the House1 would rife on that, very day, or the next, for the Easter holidays. "Many noble Lords who how attended would probably be out of town, and be engaged about their private affairs; he himself, perhaps, would be one of those. On that ground only he thought it would be better to poftpone the consideration of the noble Earl ’ s, motion till after the recefs, which would remove the only so lid objection ‘that appeared to him to be made, to it. During the residence of noble Lords in the country, they, might collect very material informationand as it was the prpfefied intention of the noble Lord to abftaih from pressing any Dill to be. _ passed into a law, a previous difeuflion of the fhbjeft, such as the noble Earl had announced, would fully, prepare their Lordships to come to a final determination early the next Winter, if it should be theJenfe of the Houie. to entertain his Lbrdship’s propqfition. Here his Lordship ' applied to so. me noble Lord near him, to know to what day after the fecefs the House would probably be adjourned .; after which, he said, if it should ' meet with their Lordships ’ approbation, he would move ^ that the noble Earl’s motion, - For the House resolving itfelf iritp a committee on VFednelclay next be altered, in the following manner, to Friday the 27th instant.

A.. 17. 81. Q E » T E Sy &$S

The Bishop 06 Laniaff rofe, arid saidafew words. - - He -

declared ., that nothing was farther ^ from his intention than Lm 1" *.. ., endeavouring to mifrepresent the meaning, or mif - state the words made ufe of by ' the noble Earl who made the motion j he never thought of applying the argument of hurry and precipitation to the bill infant to be introduced, by the noble *

Lord. If he had so expressed himself he alTurea his Lord - ship and the House, that he had not so intended. His particular objections were directed to the resolutions; which, if agreed to, were proposed to be framed into Handing orders, which, in his opinion, would avail very little, if not ' adopted by the other House, for they would be only binding; on ' ~ their Lordships and not upon the other fjoufe.. It was in that light merely - he meant to flare, the objection, because the Handing orders till fanCfcipned by the other House, would answer no one puvpofe whatever, and the time and attention which those proportions would take in both Houses, considerin ' g the very advanced period of the fession, when they would be badly attended, fully, in his apprehension, sup - ported the objections which ther noble, Earl imagined were made to his intended bill.

Some confuflon, or rather a sudden converfatibn arose about the table, which could not be distinctly heard below the barthe first. thing which was heard, was from the woolfack, which, declared,. ' ( i that thisf Hopfe do adjourn to Monday next. V - —Ord ' ered. •. .. '

The Duke of Richmond strongly objected to what he called D; jI ^ e this sudden and informal adjournment, which he contended ^ mon was unprecedented.. It was again# all rule, and order, he. said, to adjourn the House in the mid# of a debate, without any motion or notice whatever. There was a regular mp ^ tion. before the House, ( i that, this House do resolve itfelf into a committee, &c. on Wednesday next. ” Until that motion was therefore disposed of, one way or another, either by a regular motion for adjournment, the previous queflionf ora. direct. negative,. it wa. s impossible to adjpurn the House.

The woolfack could only put the question u; on a motion re -, gularly made; in the present instance no such motion hac£ been made, and if it had, no question had been regularly put upon it; but the noble and learned Lord on the woolfack had barely contented himself with putting the ordinary quef - tion of adjournment, as if no business whatever remained before the House undisposed of Surely, it would be decent to wait for the noble Earl to abandon his motion before it it were thus set slide. ’

. Thp

LordCia *

Xtllor,

P A R Ii I A M E N T A RY

A. 1781 ;

• The Lord Chancellor affirmed, that the motion of adjournment had been regularly moved by the learned Prelate, who spoke before the noble Duke, and that, as he understood, by the noble Earl who made the motion on which the House

Earl of gentry.

Sishop of harjaff.

Duke of Riibtr. cxd.

had been debating; arguing, that there was nothing irregular or contrary to the established mode of their Lordships proceedings, it was sufficient to observe, that a motion of adjournment, or the order of the day, amounted to a full negative to any questibn at the time depending before the House. '

The Earl of Coventry said, if a mere ' private suggestion ' was to atnount to a motion, his public declaration was intitled to a preference. He had notified his; intention as soon as the noble and learned Earl had concluded his reply, that if agreeable to his Lordship and the House, he would move that the motion be deferred till the ' first day after the recefs, which would be the 27th instant, as he understood from ibme noble Lords near him, whom he had taken the liberty to inquire to what day it was supposed the House intended to adjourn. On ' this ground, and in respect of candour and regularity, unless the noble Earl himself chose ' to withdraw his motion, he thought himself intitled to move his motion in preference to any other which had been subsequently suggested.,

The Bishop of Landajf said, lie had been authorized; by the noble Earl who made the ' motion, to move the question of adjournment, and suggested such consent t6 the woolfack, ' which was What induced the noble and learned Lord to put

the question as He had done.

The Duke of Richmond Teemed by no means satished with this explanation. The consent of the noble Earl who made the motion, should have been notified by himself in a public manner. He was as capable of such a declaration as of making the motion, and supporting it in a very long and able speech; but allowing that the noble Earl’s consent was as full and explicit as it had been described, such confejit could in no way operate upon the established mode of conducing their Lord/bip’s proceedings for taking it in either sense, that the noble Earl had consented to withdraw his motion, or that the learned Prelate, without any such previous consent, had suggested his intentions to the Chair in private, of mov - ' ing an adjournment, yet neither the consent of the former, j nor the suggestion of the latter, could authorise the woolfack to put the question in the sudden and unejjpe&ed manner he had put it; and in confequence of so doing, declaring th ?

sense

A. 178 *.. D E B A T4 £ & i. s1

sense of the Hdufe to be, to adjourn till Mpnday ncfct; erne question should be disposed of before another ' was entertained,. and the motion ought to be announced infvich a manner, that the House might have it in their option to agree or diluent to it when they learned its purport, which he once more begged leave to repeat was not the case in the present instance.

The Lord Chancellor rofe in great apparent warmth; he Loi - d Chat - said, it was uncandid, if not indecent, to prevent any mem - ber from withdrawing his motions if he thought proper, and he was astonished, that the noble Duke should continue to perlift in his objections, after the noble Earl had intimated his wjfh to a learned Prelate near him, in consequence of which the learned Prelate had conveyed to him such intimation ;

The motion put was a motion of adjournment, he had received it from the learned Prelate, and whether the noble Earl had or had not previously consented was of very little consequence, as the motion of adjournment Was regularly made, and the quehion as regularly put upon it.

The Duke of Richmond said a few words in reply : he was Duke of glad to hear so liberal a principle laid dawn as that of per - RMmnd mitting noble Lords to withdraw their motions whenever they thought proper. He had been a witness to several in - stances of a contrary nature; he could not charge his memory whether they arose finee the noble Lord, - presided upon that woolfack, but he was certain there had been instances of a recent nature, where the mover had not been permitted to withdraw his motion. In future therefore, so far as the learned Lord ’ s, weight or influence might be supposed to extend, he was. glad to hear that he should havefo powerful an advocate to allift him in abolishing a custom, which in the learned Lord’s opinion, was uncandid, if not indecent. But even though the general pipposition had been flriflly true that it was - uncandid and indecent to refuse any noble Lord to withdraw his motion, it did not apply in the particular case, for as yet, he had not heard from the noble Earl himself that he wiished to withdraw it.

The question was then repeated from thevvoglfack, aitdthe Hdufe adjourned till Monday.

1 Abril 9 *

Private bufinefsi No debate ;

April iOi Private bufineE; No debate.

Vo. I, LI Alpril

558 PARLIAMENTARY A. 17S1.

April 114

Several public and private bills this day. received, the royal assent by commission, after which the House adjourned till Tuesday fortnight, the ift of May.

May 1 k

This day the House met, pursuant t their adjournment before the recefs.

Prayers being over, the House proceeded to dispose of fe -. veral orders which flood on the Journals, and to receive such Reports from the Lords ’ committees as had not before been passed the committee.

The order which flood for this day, for hearing counsel at the bar in respect of the rights of the several noble claimants to the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England, was discharged, and the fame ' "ordered to be heard on Monday next, the yth inflant, of which all parties were desired to take notice.

The other customary business being finished, a petition Was presented at the bar in behalf of a criminal convicted,. and ordered for execution by the Court of Jufliciary in Scotland, for a street robbery within the city of Edinburgh.

The contents of the petition were substantially as follows : That the petitioner, James By water, late a sailor aboard his Majesty’s armed ship the Alfred, lying at Leith, and then a prisoner in the Toilbooth of Edinburgh, was apprehended on a charge of flopping a person the evening of such a day, and robbing him of a lilver watch, four shillings and his hat, for which the said By water was, after full proof, ordered for execution on such a day in the Grafs - Market, the usual place, of execution. It farther flatted, that the law of Scotland ordains, that a copy of the pannel, or the perl ' ons ordered to be Summoned to lerve on the jury shall be delivered to the prisoner so many days before his trial, but that the copy of said pan - ' nel, delivered to the prisoner, was not the fame as that ac -

tuallysummoned, by which means he was deprived of the right of challenge, which rendered the whole proceedings had against him irregular, informal, and illegal; and finally praying, that their Lordship’s would interpose their judicial authority, and prevent him from suffering ’ contrary to law and justice.

Earl of The Earl of Mans fields as soon as the petition was read, Mar. tfM. rofe an ( i delivered a moil able and learned speech. : He said,. ... ., ' ' he

A. 1781, DEB - A ' T - E S. -

he would Confine what he meant to submit to their Lordships consideration : within as narrow a compass as the nature of the subjecf would admit; and, as it was a matter of some importance, so far as it concerned the general system of criminal jurifpruderice in the northern part of this kingdom, he. intreated their. Lordship’s attenti®n for a few minutes.

His Lordship observed, that real justice would not be defeated, though the petitioner should suffer contrary to those distinClions, which the laws of all civilized countries had very wifely established for the furtherance of protecting the innocent and for punching the guilty; he meant, where a mif - take, or wrong or false pleading might affect the former as.. well as the latter. The present case did not however come recommended to their Lordships upon any such ground; the objection taken by the appellant in the present instance, being only, a trifling mifnomer, ' which defect had been cured by the appellant himself by his subsequent conduCt.

The appellant came to their Lordships for relief upon this groundj and upon this only; - that of a mere literal error, not applicable, to himself in any sense, or which might or could affect him as an irinocent man. It would be necessary to state briefly how the law of Scotland flood, in order to enable their Lordships the better to decide upon the merits of the petition.

By the laws of Scotland, if a person is libelled or accused of ' an offence, the proof of which may draw after it a capital pu - nishment, - he is intitled to a copy of the names of the persons. ftunmoned tp try him, as is the case of persons charged with acts of high treason in England; and it is likewise required, that said copy shall be delivered to him so many days previous to his trial. If" the culprit, when put upon his trial,. should object tp or challenge any of his jurors, the law fays, another person shall he 1 worn in the place of the person so objected to or challenged. In the case of the petitioner, it happened that in the lift of the pannel who were to try him, the name of Lothian, one of tKe jurors, was wrong spelt on the back of the libel or indictment, and the prisoner took no notice of it at the time. T he juror when called to the hook, was, announced, and answered by his proper name ( Lothiatv ) and so the court proceeded to trial.

After. conviction, when the mifnomer was first discovered,. the objeClion was taken and the matter of law argued before the Court of Justiciary, but over - ruled. This was clearly a brief stat ' e of the petitioner’s case, who had now appealed ' LI 2 to

PARLIAMENTARY A. 178 !

to their Lordships, on supppfirion that the mifrtomer had proved fatal to the libel or indi£lment; but their Lordships would perceive, that although the objection had been much stronger, and the mistake more material, the prisoner had waved his right of challenge, by not exercising it at the time; consequently, though their Lordships were competent in their judicial capacity to entertain the appeal, it wotfid not he fit to entertain it on the merits : but as he Was of opinion that no such appellate jurisdiction was veiled in that House, from ' the supreme criminal court in Scotland, nor of courle from any inferior one, he would beg leave to Hate the reasons which induced him to be Of that opinion.

The question inr this point of view he took to be limply thisWhether that House was authorized by law or ufage to enter laid and decide Upon appeals from the de ' cifion of the criminal judicatures of Scotland ? —This would leqd him to the original fight, as it might be now argued, if it had been for the first time the question had been - started j the other, what the Uniform conduct of that House had. been in fimir lar cases ? ' 6

Their Lordships had frequently decided, and repeatedly - determined, that they had no such appellate jurisdiftion, as he should hereafter more fully explain, by reference tp several instances in which such appeals had been dismissed; as to the other point, it would be proper to enquire into the state of the criminal jurisdiction in Scotland, antecedent to the aft of union, p. tffed in the year 7p&; because whatever power of appeal was exerci fed by the Court of Parliament, or House - of Lords in Scotland, previous to that period, vyas just as piuch, and no more, as their Lordships wore now competent to exercise. In civil Cafes, the right Of appeal tp the House of Lords in Scotland, was he believed coeval with, the corti ftitution; in criminal cases, he took it to he exactly the re. r verfe. When the Parliament of Scotland was abolished, of rather its reprefenlative, deliberative, kgiftative, and judicial power incorporated into that of Great - rBritain, the right of appeal in civil, cafe§ devolved on the British Parliament; ' While ort the other hand, the Scotch Peerage poflefting nd1 such right, the criminal judicatures of Scotland - flood pre - ci. fcly after the Union as they had before. His Lordship here quote, d a case or two in the reigq of Charles II. of attempts being made by the Lords in Scotland to exercise such aj&r pfdiction over the criminal courts of the kingdom, : but ob - feryed that thOfe attempts had mifearried,

•. .. .. ... ’ ’ "s ' ’ After

a6x

A. 1781. DEBATES.

After dating his opinions pretty much at large, upon this part of his subject, his Lordship proceeded to state such attempts as had been made by criminals convicted in Scotland to seek red refs by appeal to tha t House.

The first which immediately came to his recollection, was founded upon the conviction of two persons for murder, and was indeed accompanied with circumstances of a most cruel arid atrocious nature.

A lady of family and fortune [ OgilvieJ had been infti - gated either by her own wicked inclinations, or perfuaded by the feduCtive perfuafions of her brother - in - law, or husbandVbrother [ Lieutenant Patrick OgilvieJ in concert with him, actually perpetrated the horrid and unnatural murder her husband.

The fact being discovered, they w; ere both tried, but be -; ing persons. of rank and affluence, they procured very able counsel, and were defended with all the powers of ingenuiry and learning; the charge, however, was so well made out, that they were both convicted, and sentenced to death; a fit punishment for so atrocious an offence ! In bar of execution, the Lady pleaded pregnancy; which plea appearing to be well founded, she was respited till after delivery; in the interim, it was suggested by so me of her friends, that by an appeal to that House, and the exertion of interest, she might pbtain a pardon, The brother had before this been execcuted, never having thought of availing himself of such a salvo. The advice of the Scotch lawyers was taken by the lady ' s friepds, arjd several of them gave their opinions, or rather dissertations on the subject, in which they displayed great theoretical ingenuity. Having affirmed speculative premises that never existed, they built a variety of arguments upon them, deducing conclusions that were extemely flattering to the case of, their client. In order to strengthen their application to the King, ( for the House of Lords was not fitting at the time when the application for a rcvifal of the judgment of the v court below was first made ) these dissertations were lodged with his Majesty ? s secretaries of state, together with a petitition, stating, that the prisoner wished to appeal to the House of Lords against the lentence of the Court - of Judiciary of Edinburgh, and ' therefore prayed a reprieve till the House fat.. The secret\ries of state, from an extreme caution iriacafe of such nicety as a case of life and death, on this application sent down a reprieve, and before the House fat, fte matter was a good deal agitated, and the law books and I ‘ lawyers

; l Vfc PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781 ?

lawyers of Scotland were consulted on the subject. He remembered the present Lord Justice Clerk was at that. time Lord Advocate, and that he lent up as able, clear, and learned an opinion on the - case, - as ever was penned on any occa - t, lion; in that opinion j the Lord Advocate stated, that he had consulted the records of the Scotch Parliament, and fub - niitted them to his brethren and the rest of the Judges of the Courts of Session, who had assisted him in examining every official document that was likely to throw a light upon the iubjeffc, without finding any one instance of an. appeal in a; criminal case. 1 The Justice stated also that he had referred to an infinite number - ©f law books, and Had consulted the moil learned of the profbifion, without being able to meet, with one precedent for such an appeal as that attempted by - the prisoner. ' When the - Parliament met, " the matter came forward, and it was upon difeufiion acknowledged on all hands, that this House was not a jurisdiction competent to receive such an appeal. The issue of the case was foreign to; the, point in consideration; but what he had ' stated was fuf - i ficient to mark the novelty of the application of 1768, the ] enquiries it gave rife to, and the result of those enquiries, : which clearly shewed the sense of the Scotch bar, arid of that House upon the subje£t at the time. The next case thatocr; cuyred, was Duncan Campbell ^ nd the Earl of Eglington, iq, 1770. - The grounds were, Campbell had shot the late Earl. ] of Eglington, and the question was, whether there was any. I final appeal from the sentence of the Court of Justiciary or j not ? On this occasion the House acted conformably to their. I eondu£t on the former one. The case, that followed this, i was that of a member of Parliament, who was prosecuted on a charge of bribery, in the Court of Justiciary, in bar of which procefs he had pleaded privilege of Parliament, and - upon the stay of proceedings the causecame before the House; but it was immediately seen, that privilege of Parliament, was no plea to exempt the offender from prosecution for a crime, a member of Parliament beings as; amenable to the laws of his country on a criminal charge as a subject of any; other description; the matter was sent back therefore to the Court of Justiciary, who were recommended to re - confid « r the nature of the prosecution. Another case mentioned by. his. Lordship, was that of the two sheep - stealers,. in 1773, - which was the last that had occurred, and had been referred, to a committee and difeuffed a good deal, but. tho committee, had expressly - decided, that. the House" had no jurisdiction in; cases of a criminal nature.

.. ‘ Exclufivs '

•A -. i78r. DEBATES.

Exclusive of these cases, his Lordship added an "infinite variety of/arguments, grounded on fafis, which he Hated, to shew that the House was incompetent to entertain and decide upon appeals from the Court of Judiciary in Scotland. In particular, he dated a case that occurred in the year 1718, and which, for want of a proper distin&ion, and being rightly understood, had been thought by some to countenance the prefumption that the House had the fort of jurisdiction. now appealed to At that time the magistrates of Elgin being inclined to shew favour to the clergy of the episcopalian profeflio ' n, bellowed a chapel upon one of them, which chapel was claimed by the kirk, as. belonging to it of right; and, in order to recover it, the kirk instituted a criminal prosecution; but the question upon which it was grounded, being altogether of a civil nature, viz. whether the chapel belonged to the kirk or to the magistrates ? the trial was held before the Court of Session, and upon their interlocutors, the Court of Judiciary proceeded to adjudge, that the person pofl ' efiing the chapel should deliver the key to the kirk, and pay a considerable fine. From the interlocutors of the Court of Session, the clergyman appealed to the House of Lords, and their Lordships reverfed all that had been done by the courts in Scotland; but the order ( which For the greater accuracy his Lordship Taid, he had referred to immediately previous to his rifing to trouble the House on the subject ) of their Lordships had been cc to reverfe the judgment of the Court of Session, and the proceedings had thereupon so that by the words, the proceedings had thereupon, it was clear the House did not think themselves warranted to interfere in a criminal case, but merely reverfed the proceedings of the Court of Judiciary, because they were founded on the judgment of the Court of Session, which was a judgment on a civil question ^ and which they went back to in an especial manner. His Lordship also ' mentioned a case of 2n attainder of a young, man who had been pardoned in this King ' s reign, but whole case was under consideration in 1754 ., when Lord Hardwicke was chancellor, and he was himself attorney - general, shewing that though the circumstances were of a peculiar nature, the House did not conceive itfelf competent to interfere. Among other arguments, he said, that where a power of jurisdiction was neither founded on the common nor on the statute law, it was to be looked for in ufuage, which in various instances made the law, but that on the present question, ufuage, was uniformly against the

argument *

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

argument, that the House had ajurisdiction in cases of cri - minal appeal, and therefore it was. impossible that the pretence fhotfld be founded. He farther added, that if the House had such a jurisdiction, it would be attended with manifeft inconvenience, because as the House was not always fitting, the jurisdiction would be sometimes dormant, and at such times the law might be compleated, and a convict executed before he had any power of lodging an appeal. For these, and a variety of other. reasons, his Lordship moved, that the petition be rejected— which, upon the queflion put, was ordered accordingly. — Adjourned to Thursday.

May 3.

Private business. No debate.

» May 4.

Private business. No debate.

May

Private business. No debate. —Adjourned to Monday.

May 7.

Private business. No debate. —Order made, upon motion, that the order of the day for taking into consideration the re - spe£live claims of the persons to the office of Great Chamberlain of England, which flood for that day be discharged j and that the fame be heard on Wednesday next, the 9th instant.

M y %.

Private business. No debate.

May 9.

. The order of the day being read for hearing counsel in behalf of the several claimants to the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England. ^ and it appearing that Lord Percy’s ( commonly called Earl Percy ) claim, was founded in" the most ancient pretenfions, his Lordship’s counsel, Me/Tns Kenyon, Howarth, and Scott, were desired to proceed in behalf of their client. Mr. Kenyon, as senior counsel, spoke first of whose - proceedings the following contains a brief - abftra£L

It was Rated byhim, that the office of Great Chamberlain of England was confirmed by King VIII. by patent, in the first year, of his reign to John the 13th Earl of Oxford and hisheirs, who had beep restored previously to his honours,

^ ' - dignities,

A. DEBATES.

dignities, ’ and estates,. by act of parliament the first of Henry VII. and he accordingly exercised : the office afterwards till his death; on the death of the said Earl it descended to his nephew and heir John the 14th Earl, an infant, the son of his brother Sir George de Vere, by hereditary right, as appears by a livery on the infant ' s coming of age itv the 12th. of Henry VIII. And the last. mentioned Earl died feiled of the fame in the 18th of the fame King.

It appears that the said last - mentioned Eari died without issue, and that John Nevill, afterward Lord Latymer, son of his lifter Dorothy Elizabeth his lifter, wife of Sir Anthony Wingfield, knight, and Urfula his lifter, wife of Edmund Knightley, esq. who was afterwards knighted, were his. coheirs; to which John Nevilli, Lord Latymer, the claimant Lord Percy his heir, being descended in a direct line % > m Catherine his eldest daughter, who married Henry, the 8th. Earl of Northumberland, as appears by the pedigree annexed, the said John Lord Latymer having left no ifltie male : it therefore, follows neceflarily that Lord Pency is the heir of John the 14th Earl of Oxford, who "died in, 1526, leifed of the office to him and his heirs, and ip of course entitled to the fame.

In 1625, 1 Charles I. on the death of Henry the 18th Earl, who died without, issue, arid who had exercised the office, of Great Chamberlain of England, the hohours and of - fice. were claimed by several person ?, whose petitions were ^ referred by the King to the House of Lords; and aftermany. hearings thereupon, and the judges having delivered their unanimous opinionthat the baronies were wholly in his Ma - jesty ' s hand. to diipofe at his ownpleafure” ( corifequently in abeyance among - the coheirs of John the 14th Earl of Oxford}, and having also delivered their opinions on the other points. of the case, the House thereupon offered unto his Majesty their opinion and advice, “ That, the title of the Earldom of Oxford might be declared by his Majesty to appertain to Robert, deVere, and that he might be accordingly established in that honour to him and to his heirs male \ and that the said office of Great Chamberlain of England might be declared by his Majesty to appertain to the Lord Willoughby and his heirs, with a salvo jure, to his Majesty. " To these proceedings The petitioner’s ancefton, the Earl, of Northumberland, the heir genera. 1 of the laid John the 14th. Earl, Was not a party; he. had been a cJofe prisoner in the Tower from j6gc to 1621, and from thattime to his death, in 16 - 22,

tqh. l, Mm - lived

PARLIAMENTARY A.. 1781.

lived in the country in retirement; having never appeared jbut once in the House of Lords during that period, which Was on the ift of December, 1621.

The opinion of the Lords in 1625, that the office might be declared by his Majesty to belong to the Lord Willoughby of Erefby, as heir general to Henry Earl of Oxford, is a decisive proof that the office was considered to be defcendi ? ble to heirs general and if Lord Percy can prove, which1 he clearly can, that he is the heir general of John the i ^ th Earl of ' Oxford, no plea of length and possession can beop - posed to his claim; for it can, it is prefumed, be very satis - fa < storiJy shewn, that a claim to this office of dignity cannot be affected by the statute cf limitations.

Since the reign of Henry I. only two instances have occurred in which the right to the office descended through a female; when the former of these happened in the time of Henry VIII, the office was ufurped by the 15th Earl against the right. When the ither took place in the reign of Charles I. the right thus descended was claimed and established j and it is somewhat extraordinary, that the 18th Earl of Oxford, froip whom, in the; second instance, the right was derived by de - scent through a female to the Lord Willoughby, had himself no title to that office, but what was founded upon an infringement of the principle of that very rule, which, in this case of Lord Willoughby, established that the office was descendible through females to heirs general.

Lady Willoughby of Erefby, when ( he contends that the office was included in the award made by Henry VIII. and thereby given to the heir male, impeaches the determination of the House, which put her ancestor in possession of at in 1625 as the heir general.

The ^ claim of her Grace. Charlotte Duchefs dowager of Athol and Baronefs Strange cannot interfere with Lord Percy’s right, ' as her Grace ? s claitpt is founded on her being - the heir general of the fame anceftof as the Lady Willoughby claims under, who was only second epufin apd heir male to John the 14th Earl of pxford.

. His Grace the Puke of Ancaster is the heir male of an ancestor who came into possession of the office as heir general against the; claim of the heir male; and cannot poflibly therefore, it is apprehended, prove any right to succeed

' It is for these reasons humbly hoped, that the office will be adjudged to belong to Lord Percy, as heir general of John

' ‘ - " ' ' ’ 1 ' ' the

A. 1781 DEBATES. -

the 14th Earl of Oxford, who died felled of the fame in 152 ^ to him ' and his heirs.

As soon as Meffrs Howarth and Kenyon had finished their arguments, Mr. Maddocks was heard, as senior counsel for the Duchefs Dowager of Athol. The case made out was in substance as follows

Her Grace was stated to be the lineal descendant and heir general of John the 16th Earl of Oxford. This John had one son, Edward the 17th Earl, arid a daughter married to Lord Willoughby of Erefby. Edward the 17th Earl married tw ^ o wives, by the first he had Elizabeth Countess of Derby, and by the second Henry the 18th Earl of Oxford ^ < who died without issue, in the year 1625. Lady Derby had James, Lord Strange, who had one daughter married to John Marquis of Athol, father of John first Duke of Athol, father of James the second Duke of Athol, lately deceased, who was father of the present Duchefs of Athol. ’

, On the death of Earl Henry in 1625, Robert I9t ^ 1 Earl, second cousin to the deceased ’ Duke, who succeeded to the title of Oxford, claimed the office of Lord Great Chamberlain, contending that the office had been annexed to the title " of Lord Willoughby of Erefby, on the other hand claimed as their general to his deceased grand - father, John the 16th Earl, on the ground that he was next cousin of the whole blood to Henry the 18th Earl, lately deceased, and the refj > e£rive claims being heard at the bar, three out of five judges were of opinion that the office did. descend to the heir general; but previous to the : delivering said opinion her Grace’s ancestors, namely Elizabeth Countess of Derby, daughter to Edward the 17th Earl, and her husband, William Earl of Derby, presented a petition, and the petition was read; upon which the following questions were propounded to the consideration of the judges. -

First, Whether the Earl of Oxford, who made the intail of the said office of Lord Great Chamberlain, was at that time seised of said office

Secondly, Admitting that he was seised of it then, whether such an office may be conveyed by the way of limiting uses

, The judges not agreeing, their opinions were delivered fcriatem on March 31, 1626, and three out of the five were of opiniop, that the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England was come and descended unto the heir general of Henry the last Earl of Oxford.

M m 3 This

26\

F A R L LA M E NTARY A. r78i.

This deciflo ' nin. favour of the heir general decided nothing as to the Countess of Derby’s title, which was then before the House, the ' question therefore between the anceftorof Lady Prifcilla Burrql, who was descended from Lord Wik, loughby. of krefby, became the subject of farther inquiry !.

After the judges opinion had been delivered on the said 31ft day of March 1626, r it was ordered, that the counsel in behalf of, the Earl of Derby, and his Countess Elizabeth, be heard. the next morning or afternooik and the counsel being; heard on said day, viz. on the 1 ft of April 1626, their Lordship’s refolded, that the office descended to Lord Willoughby [ of Erefby ], as cousin. and heir general to Henry : the lai ^ ' Earl ' of Oxford .;; ■

I n the Journals of the fithof the said month and year, an abftra£b of the whole proceedings is entered, and their Lordship’s offer to his Majesty. their humble opinions and advice, that said office of Lord Great Chamberlain, ' be declared by ' his Majesty, to appertain to said Lord Willoughby [ of Erefbyj and his heirswxxh. Tifalvo jure to his Majesty•

. The Dutchefs of Athol’s counsel contended, that the question Ofi which the judges first decided, - and upon which too all, the subsequent proceedings refted, was merely confined - to the two. claimants before the House when the question was first framed, namely, between the then Earl of Oxford and Lord Willoughby of Erefby, who was clearly heir general. in preference to the Earl, was no more than a who very distant relation, whereas Lord Willoughby’s mother was the daughter of John - the fix tee nth Earl, ' was lifter, to Edward the seventeenth Earl, to whom Robert the nineteenth Earl, the present claimant, was only collaterally related. -

The only ground on which the judges could have framed their opinion, and the House afterwards have agreed to and confirmed it, was, that the Countess of Derby being only the fifter of the half - blood to Earl Henry, - the eighteenth Earl, the person who died last seised of the office •, whereas, : Lord Willoughby was related, though more remotely, by the whole blood. It wasftrongly urged by her Grace’s counsel ', that the half - blood is no bar to a claim of a present dignity ^ because if it partakes of the nature of an honour descendible, as in the present, case of a peerage, the ’ succestion1 rauft be governed by "the fame rules; that is to say, if the honour was defcindible to the heir general, which was the title under which Lord Willoughby ofEreiby claimed, that thb

• Countefi

j\. 1781. D E B A T :; E S. :

Countess of Derby, evem in that light, was heir general to the first grantee; she was fitter, besides to Henry, the daft Earl, and heir general of John, the sixteenth Earl,, under whom Lord Willoughby [ of ErefbyJ derived his claim,. with this : difference too, that in each instance her competitor. was. one degree farther removed from the twosuccessive. Earls/ who died seised o. f the honour, Edward and Henry.

If it was an estate in land, it was confelfed, that the law would exclude the lifter by the half - blood, by giving a preference to the cousin by the whole blood, but that it was prefumed was not the point in issue, but whether, as in the care of a peerage, the heir general must claim under the first : grantee, or under the person jaft seised; but, it was humbly contended, that the only actual determination.. the House had ever come to, however extraordinary the conclusion migfit be, was, that in 1626, when both by the advice of the judges, their Lordship’s determined, that the honour defeended to the heir general, though they; misapplied the general. prin -. ciple to the particular case. It was a good bar tp the then Earl of Oxford, who was not the heir general, and lo far. supported the claim of the Countess of Derby; but when the Earl of Oxford’s claim to the Great Chamberlainship was set aside, the Countess of Derby was clearly heir general in respefl of an honour, though her being of the half blood would have excluded her from taking any species of landed property by defeept. < The rule of inheritances was therefore unfitly applied to a claim of a title of honour ^ which is foiely and exclusively descendible to the heir of the first grantee.

The office of Lord Great Chamberlain was a personal dignity, and held of the King by grand fergeantry. It differs from the law of landed defeents in a great variety of instan - ces. No fine of an honour can be levied, nor can an honour be alienated as in the case of landed property. A brother can never succeed, unless his name be inserted by way of remainder in the original grant. An honour, or the exercise of it cannot be divided, it must devolve, and of epurie be exercised by ? a single person.. No length of time is a bar, as in the case of landed ‘property. As an instance in point, personally ' applying to one of the competitors [ Lady ErefbyJ the barony of Willoughby has been for a great length of time in abeyance, and has been only lately decided in favour of the present possessor. Their. Lordship’s Journals are. full of proofs ' of this doftxine, and indeed, in feme in&ances,

' baroiuea

SBi. PARLIAMENTARY A. tjSu

baronies have been claimed, and the claims, have been granted after the honours had Iain dormant for Teveral centuries.

It was riot meant to impeach tile determination of the House of Lords in the year 1626, but it was fair to suggest, that their Lordship’s were milled, and upon an unintentional mif - flatirig of the case, perhaps induced to misjudge the claim of the Earl and Chuntefs of Derby, their noble client’s ancestors, and so far from suppoling that the present was an antiquated claim, suddenly revived at so great a distance of time, and totally given up in the year 1626, the fast was, that at the end of aimost forty years, namely in 1661, petitions were presented by the Earls of Derby and, Oxford, for a re - hearing of their respective claims, and upon the question, after receiving the petitions, whether the hrft petitioner’s claim, the Earl of Oxford, should be confined to matter of error, the votes were equal.

The Duchefs Dowager of Athol cannot pretend to say what motives induced her noble ancestor from urging the matter of error, which upon the carrying of the question he might, if he pleased, bring forward 3 but whatever the noble Earl’s reasons were for declining to give himself any farther trouble, it could not affect her fight, which being personal mid inalienable in its nature, could not be prejudiced by any species of negligence, mifconception, or poiitive aft of any of her intermediate ancestors, unless in the case of forfeiture for felony or treason, which was not pretended. '

. The House adjourned at half paft fix o ’ clock; counsel ordered to attend at two o ’ clock to - morrow afternoon. ’

J\day 10.

Mr. Urflihie followed Mr. Maddocks in support of the claim of the Duchefs Dowager of Athol, and cited several cases out of law - books, particularlarly from Raftal’s and Coke’s Eptries, to support the general proportion on which his client’s case was maintained, c ( that honours were. not governed by the rules of law, as in cases of landed descent; ” ' and a passage in Coke Lyttleton, wherein it was clearly laid down, that an office of honour was impartible between copartners, but was foie and defcindable, according to the nature of the grant made to the first grantee or ’ ancestor,.. who possessed the honour or office, was cited.

Solicitor ' The Solicitor General [ Mr. Mansfield ] was. next heard on General, the part of Lady Prjfcilla Burrel, Baronefs Willoughby of Erefby, ' and after stating her pedigree, that ffie was lifter to

the

A. 1781. DEBATES.

the last Duke of Ancaster, and lineally defended from Lady Willoughbj ', daughter to John the sixteenrh Earl of ' Oxford, and heir general to Henry the eighteenth Earl, who died seised of the office, and from Lord Willoughby, who succeeded to that, office in 1626, and that the fame had been regularly exercised by her ancestors, thence, downwards to the decease of her late brother, r - - Mr. Solicitor proceeded to animadvert upon the cases made out by the counsel for the two preceding claimants, Earl Percy and the Duchefs Dowager of Athol. ',

He stated, that in the fifth year of the reign of King Henry I. ^ jberic de Vere ( the second of that name, whose son was created. Earl of Oxford by King, Henry II. ) received a grant of this office, to hold to 1 him and his heirs, as freely and honourably as Robert Mallett, or any ether person before or after him, ever held the fame *, and with such liveries and lodgings of his court as belonged to that office.

From this period the family of the Veres continued in the enjoyment thereof : but upon the accession of King Henry VIII. John the thirteenth Earl of Oxford, received a confirmation of this office to him and his heirs, and exercised the fame, until his decease; when it defeended to his nephew and heir, John the fourteenth Earl of Oxford, who died leifed thereof in the year 2527, leaving three lifters, his coheirs at law; and John the fifteenth Earl of Oxford, his second cousin, and heir - 2nale.

Upon the decease of the fourteenth Earl of Oxford, a dispute arole between his heirs male, and his coheirs and their husbands, concerning the possession and partition of the honours, offices, and other hereditaments, which. he died seised of; and in order to decide such differences, all parties submitted their titles1 to the determination and award of King Henry VIII. who, in the 23d year of his reign, made his award and decree between the said parties, and thereby bestowed this office, amongst others, with several other here - ditaipents, upon John the fifteenth Earl of Oxford, in fee; and gave fevetal manors, messuages, lands, and hereditaments, other part of the estates of John the - fourteenth Earl, to each of his coheirs general : and by an act of Parliament passed in the fame year, ( after reciting in general terms that. such an award had been made ) it was enacted, that the said John, then Earl of Oxford, should hold and enjoy to him, and his heirs for ever, all such castles, lands, offices,

&c.

PARLIAMENTARY. A. 17S1.

' ' ‘

See. and other hereditaments, which to the fame Ea ' rl and his. j heirs, by the fame award w; ere decreed, with the usual saving |. claufeof all right to all persons, except the therein before - |. mentioned John Nevy 11, Anthony Wingfield, and, dame I. Elizabeth his wife, Edmund Knyghteley, and Urfula his wife, j and the heirs of the said John Nevy 11 ^ Elizabeth, and Ur - fula; and it was thereby also enacted, that the Said John I Nevyll, dame Wingfield, and Urfula Knyghteiey, according I _ to the purport of the said award, ffiquld enjoy all, such ma - 1 nors, Sec. which to them were decreed by the said award, in 1 such manner as in the said aft is particularly mentioned.

In consequence of this. award, John the fifteenth Earl of Oxford enjoyed, and in the 31ft year of Kinff ' Henry VIII. died, seised of the office of Lord Great Chamberlain ’ of England; and although it appears that his son John, the Sixteenth Earl of Oxford, was interrupted in, and withheld from the enjoyment of this office, which was his undoubted inheritance, during the latter part of the reign of King Henry VIIL and the Short reign of King Edward VI. yet he appears to have been restored to, and reinftated therein upon the accession of Queen Mary, and to have •exercised the fame at her coronation, and to have died seised. thereof, in the fourth year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth;. and upon his deeeafe, his son Edward the leventeenth Earl of Oxford, inherited and enjoyed thisoffice, and transmitted the fame to his. son Henry de Vere, the eighteenth Earl of Oxford, who died seised thereof in the year 1625,. without issue; which occasioned the dispute between the heirs male and heirs general of the last named Earl, particularly mentioned in the foregoing case, which was finally, decided in favour of the person from whom Lady Willoughby of Erefby is lineally descended.

In the caf < ? Stated by Lord Percy ( suppofing his defeent from Dorothy, wife of Lord Latimer, ban be proved ) his claim depends solely upon the before - mentioned confirmation. of this office, to John the thirteenth Earl of Oxford, n fee, unaccompanied with any exercifo or enjoyment of it, or any claim thereto by those from whom the noble Lord is descended, from the 18th year of the reign of Henry VIII, in the year 1527, down to this present time, a period of above two centuries and a half, and in direct opposition to the award of - his Majesty, confirmed by aft of Pajliament ? £nd acquiesced under by all the ancestors of Lord Percy.

A. 1781. DEBATES *

But as a full and complete answer top the claim now set up by Lord Percy, it is submitted to this honourable House, that the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England, being an office with. confidevabie fees and profits annexed to it, may be sued for and recovered by an assize, or other real action; that it falls within the description of hereditaments in the statute of limitations, palfed in the 32c ! year of the reign of King Henry VIII. which might be pleaded in bhr to any action brought by Lord Percy, for the recovery of it : and that - your Lordships will not give any extraordinary - countenance to a claim which has lain dormant forabove two centuries an a half, and to which, if prosecuted a court of law, there would be an unanswer - able objection.

With respect to the claim of the Duchefs Dowager of Athol; suppofing the fa£ts Hated in sup. port of it, as far as they relate to the dispute concerning this high office in 1625, to be true; the conclusion from those fa£ls does by no means follow; nor does it appear that there was any error or mistake in the certificate of this honourable House to King Charles I. in the year 1625.

For as it is admitted by the Duchefs Dowager of Athol, that the several titles of all the competitors in 1625 were before the House, and that the opinion of the majority of the judges, upon the contest between the heir - general and the heir - male of Henry, the eighteenth Earl of Oxford, was in favour of the heir - general; and that subsequent to the deli - very of that opinion, viz. on the ift of April, 1626, the council for the then Lord Willoughby and Lady Derby ( both of whom claimed in the character of heir - general to the eighteenth Earl of Oxford ) were heard before this House. It clearly follows, that the only possible dispute between the counsel for these parties; the only possible fub - je£t matter of debate for the House - upon the arguments of these counsel, and the respective claims of the then competitors for this office mufl have been, whether the then Lord Willoughby or Lady Derby, Ihoulcl be considered, upon that occasion, as heir - general of the then late Earl of Oxford; and whether the rules applicable to thfe defeent of lands and other real property, or those which ar& confined to dignities and titles of nobility, should govern the decision of ' the questionfhen before - them. It is therefore infilled, on the ground ' s of said solemn determination, that this office. defended to Lord Willoughby, as cousin and heir - general to Henry, Vol. I. N n then

274

Ear ! of Mansf. eldt

PARLIAMENTARY A. 781,

then lafh Earl of Oxford, without calling, in, or requiring the assistance of the judges, is a clear decision of this ' honour - able House, that the rules relative to real property, and not to titles of honour and nobility, are applicable to, and triuft govern the descent of this office; and that the certificate afterwards presented to his Majesty, ( although there may be some inaccuracy in the expression ) was perfectly consistent with the opinion of this honourable House upon the claims of the several parties, which had been fairly and fully dif - ctiffed before them.

The House role at fix o ’ clock, and adjourned to the next day.

May 3i.

As loon as the private business was finished, Mr. ‘Dunning, as second counsel - for Lady Erefby, resumed the adjourned pleadings of the preceding day, and proceeded to illustrate such part of the case and arguments as had been more {lightly touched, or lefs infilled upon by his learned leader. He argued the matter with, infinite ability and ingenuity; but as we have previously given the general outline which marked the leading features of this Lady’s case, we forbear to purtue.. this learned advocate through the various diflin&ions and nice legal definitions which he displayed on this occasion.

Mr. Macdonald ? counsel for the fourth claimant in this cause, the present Duke of Ancafler, informed their Lord - ships, that ne would not trouble them at that time with a particular detail of the arguments and facts upon which his client grounded his expectation of being appointed to the high office then in litigation, as he understood it was the intention of the House to decide first concerning the merits of the claims made by Lord Percy and the Duchefs of Athol, before they proceeded to an ultimate determination upon the general question, which of the parties were now by law entitled to exercise the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England. He would therefore reserve himself till these other claims had been disposed of according to the pleasure of their Lordships. v

Mr. Kenyon was next called upon to reply in ' behalfof the Duchefs of Athol, as was Mr.. Maddocks in behalf of Lord Percy.

The counsel by order being withdrawn from the bar, the Earl of Mansfield rofe and observed, that out" of the four

" claimants

A. 178r. DEBATE S. - 1

claimants who had made application to that House for their Lotdships determination on the question, who, possessed the legal rights to the office of Great Chamberlain of England, there were two who refted their. pretentions on a different foundation from the rest, and were liable to different objections. These were, first, Lord Percy, who derived his claim from the circumstance of his being a direct and lineal deicendant of Margaret, daughter of Sir George De Vere, next brother to John. the 13th Earl, and lifter to John De Vere the 14th Earl of Oxford, who succeeded to his uncle John the 13th Earl, who died without issue, both of whom died seised of the said office of Lord Great Chamberlain, a great many years before - the place devolved to the possession of those subsequent Earls of Oxford, from whom the other claimants derived their respective claims, namely, John the ] 6th, Edward the 17th, and Henry the 18th Earls of Oxford. The noble Lady’s case, which stood on the fame ground so far as the question was to be considered as a question of mere law, v/as the Duchefs Dowager of Athol, It is true Ihe claims the right to the office from being defeended from the fame immediate stock as the Lady Willoughby of Erefby, and the present Duke of Ancaster, namely, being defeended from the grantee, Edward the 17th Earl, whole eldest daughter was married to the Earl of Derby; whereas Lady Willoughby is more remotely related, being but de - ! - feended from John the 16th Earl, yet there was one objection which - applied - in common to both cases which had been alluded to, and that was that they came within the letter of the statute of limitations. Upwards of 250 years had elapsed lince the person died from whom Lord Percy claimed as the source of his pretenfions and 150 had passed away lince the predecelfor of the Duchefs of, Athol, from whom ( he at this time claimed, had asserted her pretenftons. A leading question therefore for their Lord - ! ships to determine was, whether or no these cases came within the act of limitation, which confines the claim to be made and maintained by some legal procefs or suit at law sixty years from the year the supposed causeof a < ftion ffirft accrued. To decide this question of law in the best manner possible, he would move that the opinion of the learned judges be

taken upon it, and that before the merits of the general

question underwent further difeuffion.. By deciding upon this question in this stage of the business, the cause would

be considerably relieved; for if the decree of the learned

; Nil 2 judges

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

judges should happen to turnout in favour of the opinion, that the two cases described with ’ nthe statute of limitation, passed in the rergn of Henry VIJI. then they would be separated from the contention, and the claims would of course be considerably simplified. If the decree should be of a contrary Jcind, then their Lordships would be relieved from all ambiguity, upon a point that would constitute a leading feature in the decision they were to make. It had been suggested to him by a noble Lord. [ Lord Radnor ] that it would be necessary, in ipfo limine of their investigation then before them, to put this question to the learned judges, whether or no the mode of urging the right to this office by a petition to, the King was a proper mode or no ? He should not have taken notice of this suggestion at that time, but for the respect he bore to the quarter from whence it originated. He wo. uldonly observe, however, that this method of proceeding had been the prescriptive pradlice of ages.. In all the succession, in all the contentions that had happened, no other mode of application had been recorded. In the determination which took place before the House of Lords, in the reign of Charles I, and W2S afterwards confirmed by the combined branches of the legislature, there were many of the first lawyers in the kingdom concerned, and there never was a period when there existed a greater number of able, honest, - learned, - ingenious counfeJ, than at that time; and the united opinion of each individual, however they might disagree in other parts, was in this instance exactly the fame, having all concurred that a petition to the Crown was the proper mode of urging the claim to this office. It had always been conceived to be the proper mode ever since; but he should not have refted upon custom only, but would have taken the opinion of the judges in conformity to this intimation given to him by the noble Lord, had he remembered an instance where a question was referred to the opinion of the judges, which - had not previously been argued at the bar of that House. None of the parties had thought it worth their while to urge any arguments on that point in the present, instance, and therefore he did not conceive it to be agreeable tp established ufage - to refer the question in the manner proposed for by the noble Earl. He had nothing farther to urge at that time than just to move their Lordships, that the following question should be referred to the opinion of the judges, namely, ^ Whether the right of Earl Percy, also the right of the Duchefs Dowager of Athol, to the office of Lord Great Chamberlain,

suppofing

D E BATE s ;

2

A. 17S1

suppofing their pedigree and cases to be as stated by their counsel, are barred by the statute of limitations ? ”

This motion was about to - be ' put, when the Earl of Ugh rofe, and very unexpectedly ventured into a competition with the learned Lord who spoke last, concerning the regularity and necessary form of their Lordships proceedings. He contended, that it was not competent to their Lordships, to come to any separate or distinCl : decision upon any of the respective clauses till the parties were all heard. ' That was not the case in the present instance. Lady Willoughby of Erefby, and her husband, as well as the noble Duke her unde, and her noble relation Lord Robert Bertie, had not been yet heard upon the merits of their respective claims; confe - quently the fame not being before the House, could not either legally or equitably be decided.

Not a syllable was offered in reply, but the motion already stated was put and agreed to, and all the judges desired to attend that House on Wednesdary next, in order to give their opinion thereon. » — Adjourned at seven o ’ clock to Monday.

May. 14,

Private business. No debate.

May 15.

Nothing but private business. Notice given from the woolfack that the judges desired farther time to consider of the question framed in the House on Friday, relative to the claims of Earl Percy and the Duchefs Dowager of Athol, to the Great Qhamberlainship of England, which had been referred to them by their Lordships for their opinion.

May 16,

Private biiftnefs, No debate.

May 17 *

Private bnlinefs. No debate.

May 18,

As soon as thejprivate business was over, the Lord Chief Baron ( Skinner ) being the only chief judge not a member of that House, rofe to give the opinion of himself and his brethren, in answer to the question propounded to all the judges, on the respective claims of Earl Percjy and the Duchels Dowager

7$. - PARLIAMENTARY A.. 1. 781 ;

of Athol, respecting the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England, namely :

Whether the right of Earl Percy, also the Duchefs Dovyager of Athol, to the office of Lord Great Chamberlain,. suppofing their pedigree and cases to be as stated by their counsel, are barred by the statute of limitations ? ’ 1

He observed, that the question he and his brethren were called to give an opinion upon, applied equally to both cases; to that of the noble Earl and to the Lady, because the they were both barred by the statute of limitations, or neither.

The statute he observed, was in the way of a remedial law, and was passed chiefly for promoting the quiet, ease, and security of the subject, and for defending the possessors of landed property, from the effect of dormant or remote claims, which it would be difficult if notimpoffible, however. unjuft. or ill - founded, to meet or defeat in a court of justice, where the proof was put upon the possessor, to shew an inde - feasible title. The numerous evils and endless litigations, : which sprang from this defeat in the common law, after pro - i perty began to be alienated, and transferred from hand to j hand, became To great a < grievance, that in the 32d year of Henry VIII, the legislature found it necessary to pass a law which enacted, that any claim which Was ' prefumed to accrue for a longer period than sixty years, previous to bringing the writ of right, should be deemed a nullity inlaw, and an un - ! interrupted p ' offession for that space of time deemed an effectual bar to all claims whatsoever. Upon this fhoFt view of the claims of Earl Percy, and the Duchefs ' Dowager of Athol, it was clear that they had come within the letter of the statute, none of the noble Earl’s ancestors having exercised the office of Great Chamberlain since the reign of Henry VIII. a period of about two hundred and fifty years; nor of the Duchefs of Athol, the immediate family of Vere, under whom derived her claim since ? 1625, a period of upwards of one hundred and fifty years.

But it had been argued in both cases, very. ingeniously at the bar; First, that the Great Chamberlainship was inalienable by the person intitled to hold it, nor could be disposed of or parted with, nor could it Iapfeor be transferred to another, by any gift, bequest, fine levied or come back to the original grantor, the King, but by forfeiture, for some crime wbrking a corruption of blood.

Secondly, that it was not necessary to prove that his ancestor or the person under whom he derived his claim, had seisin no more than in a writ of dower, and in several other species of writs, where it was suficient to stare the passing of

the

h. 1781. DEBATES. 1 279

the deed or ' record of the grarit, without proving the actual seisin, thereby making. out the title of the ancestor or othec person under whom the party claimed.

Thirdly, the intrufiori and subsequent possession, having been wrong, ab initio, no length of time or possession could establish. a title in the wrong doer.

It was likewise argued, that the present was an hereditament, and not of course bound by the rules which directed landed descent; and laftly, that although the the statute of limitatations was a general law, affecting landed property, it was not understood to apply to the patrimony of the church, which was given as a gratuity or reward for personal service.

In ar. fwer to the first, that the office could not be alienated or divested out of the person seised, the fail Teemed clearly otherwise, from the instances {fated and acknowledged in all the cases; for the fame had been ' rendered into the King’s hands, and such surrender had hitherto remained unimpeached, In another instance, it had been annexed to the title, and part of the possessions of an Earl of Oxford, under an av/ard of Henry VIII. and by the virture of an act of Parliament, which was in the nature of an agreement among the parties litigant, and made binding upon their successors; which agreement was acquiesced in by all the parties then in being for three generations.

The present claim, he observed, differed from writs of dower, and other writs of a similar nature, for it was suffici - ent to prove an endowment to establish the right, which was ail that was left £0 the jury to try; whereas, to {hew the right to an office, it was necessary to prove that the person last seised was intitled to exercise that office, which was not a matter in a variety of cases which could be determined by a jury, becaufeic might poffibly involve a question of law; or though the person described to have exercised the office might have been seised thereof, he might have been seised of the fame, to the wrong and prejudice of another person; the fact of seisin was one thing, the right to that seisin formed another question; consequently, mere seisin was not deemed sufficient to establish a title; there needed no better proof than although the fifteenth Earl of Oxford was seised of the office, and exercised it,

I performing all the necessary functions, he deemed it farther I necessary to have his title confirmed by Henry VIII.

I It was urged at the bar, that the office of Great Chamber - j lain was an hereditament, and therefore rauft go to the male 1 heir ;, or, in default of one, to the heir general. This was I 9 i

i

P A R; L I A M E N T A R Y A. 1781 *

a law do£hine, which when he heard it, he confessed much furprlfed him 5 he had ever learnt to hold the very contrary doctrine to be law; and had uneferstood that hereditaments were alienable in the same manner as lands, and subje£t to all the rules, of landed defeent. He supposed by hereditaments was meant, all offices, franchises, duties, tolls, &c. called incorporeal hereditaments, in contradiction to profits, reserved rents,. &c. growing or issuing from the foil. He believed it was enough to observe, that every day’s experience proved the contrary; thatall hereditaments of an incorporeal nature, when octyafion required, - were alienated, fold, or parted with, just in the fame manner as landed property, nnlefs the fame was specially prohibited byfomelaw, or confirmed by custom time immemorial. An argument had likewise been urged nearly allied to the latter, that the statute of limitations was not a general law, but left the common law in being at the time, just where it found it, except where the object of the statute was specially pointed out. Such, it was said, was the case respecting all ecclesiastical bodies and the clergy in general, upon whose claims. the statute did not operate. The reason was clear, upon more accounts than one, because there was a law passed in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, to prevent alienations of the possessions of the church j. whereas the law respecting the defeent of lands, was calculated to encourage frequent changes, and transfers of that species of property. The patrimony of the church was besides in the nature of a corporate trust, for the benefit of the successors as well as the persons in possession; and the maxim in law, that no length of time can bar - the claims of the church, is a maxim founded in wifdom and found policy -; because it is a perpetual preventative to those who might be. otherwise tempted to enter into fraudulent agreements with those in possession, to the damage and injury of all their future successors; as the person who should part with a valuable. confederation, would be liable to be called in queston at any future period, however distant.

For - these reasons, and several. others of a. collateral nature, he informed their Lordships, that the judges were ' unani - moufly of opinion, that the claims of Earl Percy and the Duchefs Powager of Athol are barred by the statute of limitations.

Notice was then given to Lady Willoughby of Erefby and the Duke of Ancaster’s courifel to proceed in making out their cases, as stated in the petitions presented to that House. The House adjourned to Monday.

A. 1781; DEBATES 28 *

May 21.

As soon as prayers were over, Mr. Solicitor General, as counsel for Lady Willoughby of Erefby, in support of her claim to the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England by deputy, against that of her uncle, the present Duke of Ancaster, opened very fully his noble client’s case.

We shall pass over such parts of it as have been already Rated in the foregoing pleadings, and merely confine ourselves to those points which applied particularly to that part of her noble competitor ’ s.

Mr. Solicitor General proceeded to state, that in confe - Solicitor quence of the before - mentioned refolutionof the House oin, ral - Peers, in the year 1626, and from that time to the decease of Robert late Duke of Ancaster and Kefleven, in the month of July last ( a period of above one hundred and fifty years ) this high office had been enjoyed without any interruption by Robert Lord, Willoughby and his defeendants, in a lineal succession, from father to son : for upon the decease of Robert Lord Willoughby ( who was created Earl of Lindfey, in the second year of King Charles I. and killed at the battle of Edge - Hill on the 23d of October, 1642, ) he was succeeded in all his titles and honours by his eldest son Mountagu, the second Earl of Lindfey, who was summoned to Parliament in his father’s life - time, in the fifteenth year of King Charles I. and continuing firmly attached to the King ^ had not, during the remainder of his unfortunate reign, and the subsequent interregnum, any opportunity of exercising his office : but at the restoration of King

Charles II. the said Mountagu, Earl of Lindfey, exhibited his claim to this great hereditary office, and upon his Ma - jesty’s coronation was admitted to the exercise thereof, and continued to enjoy the fame until his decease in Jujy, x666.

Upon the death of the said Earl Mountagu, all bfis titled and honours, and amongst others, this hereditary office, de - feended upon, and were enjoyed by his eldest son Robert, the third Earl of Lindfey, until the month of May, 1701, when he died, leaving Robert, the fourth Earl of Lindfey ^ v his eldest : son and heir; who in his father’s life - time, in - April 1690, had been summoned to, and fat in Parliament as Lord Willoughby of Erefby; and on his father’s death succeeded to the Earldom of Lindfey, and the hereditary office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England; and was afterwards, in the year 1706, created Marquis of Lindfey,

Vol. I, O® and

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

and in the year 1715, Duke of Ancaster and Kefteven; and continued in the enjoyment of this office until his decease, in July 1723; when all his titles and honours descended upon his eldest son Peregrine, the second Duke of Ancaster and Kefleven, who was likewise in the life - time of his father, when Marquis of Lindfey, funmioned to Parliament in the month of March, 1714, as Lord Willoughby of Erefby, and after his father’s death continued in the exercise and enjoyment of this hereditary office, until January 1741, when lie died : upon his death his eldest : son Peregrine, the third Duke of Ancaster and Kefteven, succeeded to the said Dukedom, and all the other titles and honours that his ancestors had been in polfeftion of, and among others, to this office, which he exercised and enjoyed until the 12th of August, 1778, when he died, leaving Robert, the late Duke of Ancaster and Kefteven, his only son, who thereupon inherited and succeeded to all the titles and honours that the last mentioned Duke Peregrine died seised of, and amongst others, to the hereditary office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England, which he exercised and continued seised of until the time of his decease.

After stating the defeent doWn to Lady Willoughby of Erefby, he observed, that ( lie was married to Peter Burrell, esq. one of the petitioners in the present case, and that the said Lady, with her lifter Lady Georgina, were lifters and co - heirs to Robert the fourth Duke, who died without issue; that the office in question had devolved - on Lady Willoughby of Erefby, as eldest co - heir, and that in her. right the said Mr. Burrell is inti tied to execute the office of Lord Great Chamberlain, because it is an hereditary office in grofs, held in grand serjeantry, which in the case of co - heirs always defeends upon the eldest, and is to be executed by the husband, which was warranted by ufage, as appears from theau -. thority of several cases herein after flated.

- The office of - Steward of England was the inheritance of Hugh de Grenteinefnil, who held the honour of Hinckley by that service, and died leaving two daughters his co - lieirs; Petronella ( or Parnell ) the eldest, married Robert Earl of Leicester, who in her. right became seised of the office of Steward of England.

And in one other instance in the, fame noble family, this office descended upon the eldest co - heir, and was executed by her husband, for the last mentioned Robert Earl of Lei eefter died, leaving, jflbe by. his said ^ wife one son, limamcd. i.. v

A. 1781. DEBATES.

Fitz ' B&rnell, and two daughters Ainicia and Margery. In ' the year 1204, Robert Fitz Parnel died without issue, leaving; his lifters co - heirs, the eldest of \vhom ( Amicia ) being married to Simon de Montford, he,; in her /. 0ht, became feifedof the honor of Hinckley and office of Steward of England.

After the decease of Walter, - who was constable of - England in the reign of King Henry I. Milo Fitz Walter, his Ion ( who for his fc - rvices to the Empress Maud, was by her cheated Earl of Hereford ) enjoyed the last mentioned office, and died in the year 1144 ^ leaving five Ions and three daughters, Margery, Bertie and Lucic; the live Tons Tuc - ceflively enjoyed this office, and died without issue, and upon the decease of die survivor of them, the office of Constable of England came to Humphry de Bohun, by his marriage with Margery, the eldest daughter of Milo Fitz Walter.

This office also defeended a second time upon the eldest coheir, and was executed by her husband, for after it had been introduced into the last mentioned family, in the manner herein before stated, it was enjoyed by the defeendants of Humphry de Bohun for several generations, in a lineal male succession, until the forty - sixth of Edward 111. when the male line of this family failed by the death of Humphry, the then Earl of Hereford, and Constable of England, leaving issue only two daughters, Eleanor and Mary, his coheirs, between whom the great inheritance of this family was. divided.

Eleanor, the eldest daughter, married Thomas of Wood - Hock, ( son to King Edward III. ) afterwards Duke of Gloucester; the second married Henry Earl of Derby, afterwards King Henry IV. Upon the marriage of the eldest daughter in the fiftieth year of the reign of Edward III. the office of Constable of England was granted to her husband by - letters patent,. jb. ut the letters. patent recite the office to be in the King ? s hands, by reason of the minority of the heirs of the Earl of Hereford, and granted to hold during the King’s plea - sure, and so long as the laid office fhouhi remain in the King’s hand’s from the cause aforesaid ., Three years afterwards, viz. in the third year of Richard II. the eldest daughter having attained her age of twenty - one years had livery of her lands, and {hereby the former, letters patent were determined, but her husband continued to be Constable of England to his death in the, twentieth year of Richard II. without any new granf5 and therefore in her right ;

The office of Champion of England, which is of the fame {enure with the two great. offices aforesaid. having descended

O o 2 to

PARLIAMENTARY A 7811.

to an heir female, appears to have been executed at the coronation of King Richard IL by JohnDymock, in right of his wife.

In the third year of the reign of King Henry III; William Marshall, Earl of Pembroke, died seised ih fee of the office of Marshal of Engl ^ pd, leaving five Tons and five daughters; all the said ions successively enjoyed the laid Earldom and office, and died without issue, and upon the death of the survivor of these fops, in the thirtieth of Henry III. Maud, who was the ejdeft of these daughters, and the widow of Hugh Bigod, Earl of Norfolk, claimed the office of Maffhal, as the eldest inheritrix, of the person last seised thereof, and her claim was allowed, and the Marshal s rod delivered to her, which, with the King’s licence, she gave to her son, Roger Bigod, then Earl of Norfolk, who did homage for the fame. This appears by a writ directed to the treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, commanding them to admit Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk, to the Marshal’s feat in the Exchequer, and the writ recites, th ^ t Matilda, Countess of Norfolk, had, with the Kir ? g ? s licence, appointed the said Earl to the office : Sjhite, Matilda ( it is said )

habet Efncciam Hcereditatis Walttri Marefc&Ui et mi Rex ea rations comiferat Virgam Marefcaic ' ue. ”

The claim of the present Duke ^ f Ancaster and LordRobert Bertie to the office has been refled upon three differentgrounds :

In the first place it has been urged, that by an implied construftion of the aft of precedence, passed ^ the first year of King George I. this office is annexed to the honour and dukedom of Ancaster, and therefore must. be enjqyed by the person who is intitled to that honour and dukedom. — - - In answer to this it is infifted, that this aft of Parlia -

ment related merely to the regulation of the precedency of Robert then Marquis of Lindfey, and those who might then after be Dukes of Ancaster, and Great Chamberlains of England, and to prevent them from taking place before other peers of equal rank, which under the statute of precedency passed in the reign of Henry VIII. they would otherwise have been intitled to do, and that this private Act of Parliament in the reigti of king George I. neither gave or took away any title to this office, which existed antecedent to that aft of Parliamenti The second argument in favour of the present Duke of Ancaster and Lord Robert Bertie is, that the present Duke is the immediate heir male descended from the line of the Ye res, Earls of Oxford, - and as such intitled to this office. — But in answer to this it is contended, : that the present Duke

' '. ’. of

185

A, 1781. D E B A T E - S.

of Ancaster cannot, with any propriety, be called the heir male of the Veres, Earls of - Oxford having descended from a female branch of that family, that is to say, Mary, filler, of Edward Earl of Oxford; and still farther it is infilled oh ' the behalf of Mr, Burrell, and Lady Willoughby of Erelby ., ' that upon a case so solemnly argued ' and thoroughly considered, as that was in the year 1626, respecting this office, the decision there in favour of the heir general in preference to the title of the heir male of the Earl Henry, is an express and pofitive authority in favour of the last mentioned claimants, and a direct bar to the present Duke of Ancaster’s claim in the character of heir male of the Oxford family, and that the authority of this decision receives additional weight fropi the conclu£f of the House of Peers upon the subsequent pe - - titions in 1661, and the length of time during which this high office has been enjoyed by those claiming under the heir general of Hen - y Earl of Oxford.

The third argument in favour of the present Duke ( or rather in favour of the right of his Majesty to grant this office ) is, that th s office cannot be held by a female.

But in the present instance it is not contended that this office can be executed by a female, but that in the event which, has Happened, the office defeends upon Lady Willoughby of Erefby, as the eldest co - heir of the last Duke of Ancaster, and that her husband is intiled to execute the fame. And this claim is well warranted not only from the authority of the several cases herein before - mentioned, but also by the of ' nion of all the judges in the sixth year of King Henry VIII. upon a case stated to them relative to the claim of the Duke of Buckingham to the office of Constable of England, by defeent from. the eldest of the two co - heirs of the Earl of Hereford,

It hath also been alledged, that this office cannot be. executed by any person under the degree of a Lord of Parliament, and that no instance can be produced of any person of

an inferior degree having been in the possession of it. - - In

answer to this it is to be observed, that as this office - was granted many centuries ago to the family of the Veres, who were soon afterwards created Earls of Oxford, and continued for. many generations in the enjoyment of this office, it is not to be expe£ted that many instances should occur of this office having been enjoyed by a commoner; but that however one such instance is to be met with, for it appears that in the first year of Henry IV, he granted this office 4 to

' PARLIAMENTARY a. 1781.

to Sir Thomas de Erpingham, who by virtue of this grant claimed to execute the fame at the coronation of King Henry IV. and that this claim was allowed, and Sir Thomas de Erpingham executed the lame accordingly; which precedent is sufficient to shew, that some of the most honourable and important parts of the service of this office may be executed by a commoner. —That Lady Willoughby of Erefby, being lineally deicended from, and one of the coheirs general of Robert Lord Willoughby, - who in the year. 3626, was admitted to this high office as the heir general of Henry then late Earl of Oxford; the laid claimants, Peter Burrell and Lady Willoughby, of Erefby, his wife, hope this honourable House will be fully satisfied of this justice of their several claims to the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England, and the liberties and dignities thereof.

Mr. Dunning followed Mr. Solicitor General, and in a very abie, but short speech, cbferved, Tthat uo argument could be set up a ^ ainst the present claimants, that of Lady Erefby, to the pclieftion and profits of the office, and of Mr. Burrell, to the exereifing of the fame in right of his wife, which did not virtually defeat the title of the two other noble petitioners, the present Duke of Ancaster and Lord Robert Bertie; but that matter having been already decided by their Lordships, by the excluding the male heirs. of the family of the Vere, in the person of Earl Percy, and the claim of the Duchefs Dowager of Athol, as the next in lineal defeent from Edward the 17th Earl of Oxford, he expected that the noble petitioners to whom he had last alluded, would perceive that they had not a foot of ground to stand upon, because everyreaion which supported their case, went in faefto the defeating the tide of the whole family of Bertie j the defeent pified through a female, the nrft Lady Erefby, After to John the 16th _ Earl of Oxford, who made our hh title as heir general t > Henry the 1 Sth Earl of Oxford. Jt was therefore absurd, in his opinion, to rest a title on the claim of being the heir male of the family of Vere, when in fact, the firit Earl of Lind fry, the common ancefter of all the noble claimants, was preferred by 2 solemn opinion of the judges, and established by 2 determination of that House in the year 1626, to the j 9th Earl of Oxford, who was the lineal male descendant, whole name was Vere, and - defeended from the Veres, Earls of Oxford, who had been in poifeiTion of the office for upwards of four centuries with little or no interruption.

The only two objection ?, in his apprehension, which carried ire leaif weigh : were firit, tbs; it was incompetent fir

a v/omar.

A. 17 81. D E. B A T E : S. 2S7

a woman to exercise the office, and whenever that happened to be the case, the King appointed a Lord Great Chamberlain for the time > till some person disqualified, by non - age, came of years to discharge the functions of the office in his own pgrfon, as a matter of right, and that since the creating of the office it had never been exercised by a commoner. To, the first objection it was sufficient to answer, that the son, if of age, the husband, or next of kin, had ' been always appointed under this species of tenure; and to the fecund, that there was a case in point, which was that of Sir Thomas de Erpinghatn, in the reign of Henry IV, who exercised all the duties and privileges of that office in the most full and ample extent, for there could nothin his opinion, be a more extensive exercise of the plenitude of the Lord Great Cham -; berlain’s power, than that of discharging the duties of that high office at a coronation, which was the fact, in the case so I ably and accurately stated by his learned leader, in the reign of Henry IV.

I After several arguments of a collateral nature, Mr. Dun - ning concluded, with expressing his most perfect confidence that their Lordships would think with him, that the office i had devolved on his noble client. Lady Willoughby of Erefby; and, that agreeably to ancient ufage, when the office descended upon a female, or an infant, that in thelat - I ter instance, with the pleasure and approbation of the King,

| the next of kin, or prochain amy, was appointed pro tempore,

S and in the event of the office, devolving upon a feme covert,

| her husband was appointed to act during the minority of the person next seised, or in case of no issue, till the office had by the death of his wife descended upon fbme other person.

I Mr. Macdonald, after stating the pedigree of his two noble clients, the Duke of Ancaster, and his uncle Lord Robert 1 Bertie, offered the following, among other arguments, in

Isupport of their respective claims.

• It was incumbent upon him, he said, to prove, that a fell male heir is equally incapable of holding as she is of exer -

S ! B cifing the office, and that she cannot by her deputy or by any husband upon whom file may be flow herfef in - marriage,

| legally claim a right to hold or to exercise this office, but I merely by the pleasure of the King and by his special licence; and that in the present case, the right to appoint the1 Lord Great Chamberlain is veiled in the King, until there be an heir capable of holding and exercising the office, and that the petitioner, the Duke of Ancaster, appears to be ^

1 the fitted person in his family, by the gracious favour of his.

I Majesty

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781 *

^ lajesty t » hold and exercise such office under all the circumstances of this case.

If the supposed grantfto Sir Thomas de Erpingham for life, ever existed, it would be found as well as all the other originals and inspeximus, or confirmatory grants of this high. dignity. But it is admitted by the Attorney - General, that it does not appear that he held the office by a grant for life.

If by a grant of the crown is meant a emporary appointment, it is admitted, that under such an appointment Sir Thomas de Erpingham did execute the office of Great Chamberlain at the coronation of King Henry IV. and so the Lord Chief Justice Crew, in the year 1626, flates the fast to be, that he for that time only was appointed by the King to dp it; but that Sir Thomas de Erpingham, ever in fa& held or exercised the whole of the office, or had any grantor appointment "for so doing, is denied, and if this instance is infilled upon, such fast ought to be proved and satisfactorily made out. Two of the high duties of the office are specified ' in the aft of Parliament, and in the execution of which the precedency is still left, ' viz. to attend the King in person; and to introduce Peers into the House of Lords, neither of which duties appear or are pretended to have been performed by Sir Thomas de Erpingham.

As to the other instance, in which he was fb unfortunate to differ from the learned opinion of the Attorney - Genera ), as expressed in his. report, viz.. the right of the eldest female heir to hold this high dignity and office, and to exercise it by her husband; it may be proper first to ob - fe. rve, that the case in 1626, does not decide any such point, it goes no farther than to decide the preference of the heir general, capable of holding and exercising the office, to that of the heir male opposed to it. -

The present point therefore muff depend upon the con - ^ deration of the nature of this, high dignity and office.

It i. s a dignity and office of the highest personal trust and confidence; it is held of the ' royal person only.

Its principal duty is an attendance on the sacred person of the l£ing, to bring his inmoil garment, to apparel him in h}s royaljrobes. and ornaments. -

It : is ameer personal dignity, fixed in the blood, and de - icendible to pofterity long as the heirs are capable of hold ing it.

It

A. 1781. DEBATES.

It is annexed to nothing local or real, and though it has a descendible quality, viz. to a, capable heir, yet it has notali the qualities or properties of a fee - limple.

For it cannot be intailed by the owner, because that might change the grant.

It is unalienable by the ovyner, for the grantee cannot transfer the trust to another, without the assent of the grantor.

In the present instance, two of the specified disabilities occur, those of a female and infant heir.

The Attorney - General, in his report, inclines to think that there is no difference in this respect, between offices annexed to lands, manors, or honours, and a personal dignity or office, like the present, which is in grofs.

And he admits that the offices of Constable, Steward, and Champion, are annexed to some honour, manor, or lands as they undoubtedly are.

But it is apprehended that the legal difference Is clear and manifeft.

All lands and inheritances local, may be conveyed by way of ufe. But inheritances personal, which have no relation to lands or local hereditaments, cannot be conveyed by way of ufe—For if so, this great officer might be made and unmade at the pleasure of the grantee, and there would be two distin£t confidences, the King’s confidence and that of the cestui qui ufe.

Offices annexed to local inheritances, are rather in the light of services reserved instead of rent.

The inheritances would be forfeitable by non - performance of the services.

If the owners of such inheritances were incapable of performing the services, they must of neceffity find and tender their deputy, to prevent a forfeiture.

The, King would allow such deputy, if a proper one; if not, he would appoint one; but it is conceived that he could not seize the inheritance, though he disapproved of the deputy—there being no refusal of the service, but an offer and tender of it.

This is apprehended to be the case where ffich local inheritances defeend to a female heir, or to coparceners. And it must be reasonably supposed, that thehufband of such female, or of the eldest coparcener, would be the propereft person to perform the services, as being more interested than a mere deputy, to attend the due performance of themand if the Vol, III, ,. P p other

PARLIAME NT ARY A. 1781.

other coparceners had husbands, as one could only execute the office, it is fit -, that one should be the eldest.

But it is conceived that the profits of the lands, manors, of honours, to which such offices were annexed, would belong to the coparceners.

This do&rinc appears in the case of the Duke of Buckingham, quoted by Mr. - Attorney General, and mentioned in Dyer’s Reports, 285, b. Plow. 39. but more fully in Keii - way’s Reports, 170, 171.

Humphrey de Bohuri, 1 fate Earl of Hereford, held the ! manors ’ of HarlefieTd, Newnarii, and Whyterihurst, in the j county of Gloucester, of the King, by the service of being Constable of England, arid had issue two daughters, and died feifen; they entered1 into the manors, and took husbands : The husband of the youngeft was afterwards King of England,. and partition was made, - and the King and his Queen took the manor of Whytenhurst for their part, and the other two manors Were allotted t : o the other husband and his wife : —Three questions were made

First, If : the Tefefvation of this tenure was good; - that is, whether, this office was or could, be reserved upon the feoffment or not ? and the Judges held that the office might be reserved, and that the refeirvation of the tenure was good.

' Secondly, When the manors wdre descended to the wives, bow they, could execute the office ? and the Judges seemed clear, that they might make their sufficient deputy toexercise the office for them; So this question and answer are dated in Keilway’s Reports. —In Dyer ’ s; Reports thus

. How the daughters before marriage could execute the office

_ It Was clearly resolved that they might make their sufficient deputy to execute it for them, and after the marriage the husband of the dded might execute it solely. r

But it was clear ^ that the profits of the manors belonged to them equally, and making but one heir, the husband of sthe j eldest would properly be deemed to have the preference of executing the office solely .; arid as both of the husbands could not be the officer, but one of them only, it was more fit that it fho ^ ild be exercised by the hfifband of the eldest. This is conformable to the general law of coparceners in matters not divisible, and where there is nothing for cpntribution or allowance to the younger, viz. the eldest to have the first : presentation to a living, the first draught of fish in a fishery, and the enjoyment of a common; the eldest to have it

1 " for

291

A. 1781. DEB A TES.

for one portion of time, and then the youngeft for the fame time afterwards.

But the third question in the Duke of Buckingham’s case {hews it to be in no way in point to the present case.

The third question was more difficult, fays the Report of Dyer; the Report of Keilway calls it the more difFufe question; and it came to be so diffuse that the fight of the question is at last loft. —Viz. Whether by the unity of parcel of the tenancy in the King, the office was determined, or it should have its existence and continuance in the other coparcener. It was resolved clearly, fays the Report of Dyer, that it fhopld have its continuance in the other, for otherwise they would have the two manors, without doing any service, for them; and they are compelled at the pleafureof the King to exercise the office; and the King may refuse it at his election and pleasure;. as well as a common Lord of a seignory may refuse the receipt of homage of his tenant, if it be not homage anceftrel.

By this k clearly appears to have been an office annexed to the manors, ' or more properly, a service reserved for them instead of rent.,

The office of Champion of England, in the Dymock family; is a service reserved upon the grant of lands, and is subject to the fame observations as the offices of Constable and Steward.

The last case quoted by Mr. Attorney - General, of the Marshal of England, is suppoled to be dire£lly in point, as being an office in grofs, and not annexed or tied to any lands or local inheritance.

But this seems to be a mistake, for it appears by a record. Hill preserved in the Exchequer, of the prelentment of jurors at affixes held at Windsor, in Berkshire, before the King’s Justices itinerant, in the twelfth year of Edward I. as to the tenure of certain Lands within the hundred of Kentbury, in Berkshire, that the fame Roger B, igod, Earl of Norfolk and Marshal of England, held XX libratns terns, by the service and serjeanty of Marshal in Hamftede. Libratct terra is said by some to contain four oxgangs of land, which would make in the whole, fourscore oxgangs of land; or as some say, librata terra means land of the yearly value of twenty shillings of lawful money, which would be twenty pounds of the money in those days.

Note, That the Earl Marshal was created about a century afterwards by. Richard IT. who treated Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham, the livft Earl Marshal.

P p 2

It

292 PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

It. does not appear therefore, that there is any precedent in point, to the present case. But it should seem that this dignity of office of Lord Great Chamberlain, being held of the King’s person, as king only, and not annexed to any honour, manor, land or local inheritance whatever, is as much a personal dignity as the Earldom of Oxford, which it so long accompanied, though wholly independent of it.

If his Majesty should grant it to the petitioners until Lady Willoughby of Erefby, or Lady Georgina Charlotte Bertie, should have ififue capable of holding and exercising it, the intention of the original grant would probably be best answered, and such a grant seems to be most confident with the dignity of the office.

Mr. Davenport displayed a great deal of law learning on the occasion, and contended, that their Lordships could not iafely come to a determination till the nature of the tenure had been defined agreeably to the rules of common law; otherwise it would leave room for endless litigations in future times, should their Lordships come to a vote, on a question, so much clouded in doubt and obscurity. On the other hand, as the arguments of counsel in support cf the Lady’s claim, one time described the honour as descendible to the heir general; the next, as not fit to be exercised by a female; again, it was partible; and as soon as it suited their convenience, they contended it was foie, and could not be divided. Such being the case, as it struck him, he wished most sincerely, as well for the fake of his noble claimants, as from a desire of ftri& justice, that the nature and conditions of the tenure were previously defined by their Lordships; and then the parties before the House and their counsel, would know how to conduct themselves, and be able to dil ' criminate between the loofe opinions hazarded on both fides, and arguments framed on the foiid arid unerring rules of law in such cases. Kail Mm : J. The counsel being ordered to withdraw, the Earl of $il *. Mamfield rofe, and after observing, that the pleadings were finally closed, said, he had taken feme pains in the precedent stage of this important cause, and was happy to recolle£t that he had a hand in shortening the business, which otherwise iriuft have been extended to a very great length; for so long as the four parties were before the House, each of them would Irave had a right to reply to the other, and by that means the cause might have been undecided several weeks longer. He hoped that there was another good consequence, that was simplifying the question, and taking the opinion of their

Lordships

2. 93

A. 178 r. DEBATES.

Lordships on the point of mere pofitive law, whether Earl Percy and the Duchefs Dowager of Athol were barred by the statute of limitations. The Judges were of opinion that the claimants were barred by laid statute. Their Lordships therefore had nothing to distradb or divert their attention, the only question they were called upon to decide, being {imply which of the claimants. Lady Erefby of Willoughby, or the noble Duke who bears the title of Ancaster, were best intitled in the first instance to the office, or if not to the profits of the office, which of them, the noble Duke, or the Lady’s husband, Mr. Burrell, were best intitled to be recommended by their Lordships to the King; pending a minority, or till the office shall devolve on some person who may unite the ability of exercising the office with the actual seisin or legal possession thereof.

After making some general obiervations, his Lordship ac - quainted the House, that he had framed a question after con -; iiilting some great living authorities, to be put to the Judges; j which, with their Lordships permission, he would submit to their confederation. —A cry of read ! read

I His Lordship then handed the motion to the vvoolfack, j which was conceived in the following terms :

{ u The late Duke of Ancaster, having died seised of the offic. e of Lord Great Chamberlain of England, leaving Lady Willoughby of Erefby, and Lady Charlotte Bertie, his lifters and co - heiresses; does the said office belong to the cldcft alone, or to both ? or, in either case, is the husband of the elfteft intitled to hold the said office ? or may both lifters I execute it by deputy ? and how must such deputy be ap - I pointed ? or does it devolve upon the King to name a proper ! person to execute the said office during the incapacity of the heirs ? ”

1 An order was then moved, that a note of said question be delivered to the Judges, and that they bedefired to attend : in their places in that House on Friday next, the 25th inft. to deliver their opinion thereon to the House.

May 22.

Private business. No debate. —Adjourned.

May 23. '

Public business in course. No motion or debate. —Adjourned to Friday.

My

4

A. 1781

594 PARLIAMENTARY

May 25.

TheCbUf The Chief Baron after reading the queflion, framed by Baron. Jj0rd Mansfield on Monday, and put by the House in due form, proceeded to take a very extensive view of the queflion in all its various aspects and relations. He Hated the original of the tenure, the implied conditions of the grant, the duties of the office, and its destination, agreeably to the rules of the common law.. Upon each of those points he was very full, and in the course of his argument, made it his particular business not only to answer the several arguments made ufe of at the bar, and Hated in the petitioners respective cases, but with remarkable accuracy and precifion, laid down the law in relation to descents, where the title of the next succes - for, nor of the person in possession, could not be affected by any aft of either one or both parties. The tenure of Grand Serjeantry Came within that description. it sprang Froni an agreement made between the Sovereign and the first grantee; and was binding reciprocally on their heirs or successors; so that while on one hand, nothing could defeat the grant of the person first seised, and his lawful successors, but an actual forfeiture arising from the commission of some crime; on the other, all those who were or might succeed him totheofficej, were bound to hold it in the manner prescribed by the grant.

He then Hated the original grant, which he observed was made to a commoner, and traced down the succession to the office regularly to Henry the eighteenth Earl of Oxford, who was the laflof that ancient family, whodiefl seised. If any doubt could have remained in his mind, whether the heir general had a preference to the heir male, the determination of that House in the year 1626, in the case of the three claimants, Vere, the nineteenth Earl of Oxford; Lady Derby ^ heir general to the seventeenth Earl of Oxford; and Lord Willoughby of Erefby, who claimed as heir general to Henry the eighteenth Earl, the person who died last seised. Upon that occasion, after the moH full and solemn hearing of all the parties, the Judges gave their opinion, that Lord Willoughby of Erefby, as heir general to the person last seised of the office, namely, Henry the eighteenth Earl of Oxford .; that the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of England, did devolve on said Lord Willoughby of Erefby, as said heir general.

The determination of that day was formed precifely on the fame rules of law, by which he and his brethren had formed their present opinion. It was formed on the nature of the tenure itself, and of the established rules of descent in cases

of

293

A. 1781. DEBATES.

of a similar nature, as in the case of the High Constable, the Marshal, and the Champion of England; in each of which it had been customary, from the earliest grants of those offices, in case of failure of male i flue in the person last seised, that the fame should devolve on the heir general.

The only two points between the parties now before their Lordships, the noble Duke, and the Lady and her husband,

Mr. Burrell, were; whether, when the ^ ffice devolved upon a woman or an infant, his Majesty might not appoint a person to fill the office till some person who might be legally seised thereof, should be in a capacity to execute it ? the other, whether any person under the degree of a Peer, could lawfully execute it

Both those objections were in his opinion easily answered. Theeldeft of the two Ladies upon whom the office had by right devolved, was married, and of course none was fitter than her husband; and as to the second, it was enough to observe, that the original grant was made to a Commoner, and that the office was exercised by Sir Thomas de Erpingham, i in the reign of Henry IV. whom he prefumed adfced at that King’s coronation as deputy, but who certainly, from the Record, appeared to have assisted as Great Chamberlain at the coronation of that prince.

After several other very learned arguments of the fame tendency, he said it was his duty now to deliver the sentiments of his brethren, who were unanimously of opinion

“ That the office. of Lord Great Chamberlain of England belongs to both tfye fillers; of Robert, the late Duke of An - cafler, who died seised of said office.

£ That the husband of the eldest is not of right entitled to execute it. r "

“ That both fillers may. execute it by deputy, to be appointed by them, such deputy not being of a degree inferior to a Knight, and > to be approved of by the King. ”

As soon as the Chief Baron had delivered the opinion ° ^ Earj af the Judges, the Earl of Mansfield rofe, and begged leave toManjitUL trouble their Lordship’s with a fewwords. He observed that the office was originally given by Henry I. to Aubrey de Vere, whose descendants, ' the Earls of Oxford, had enjoyed it until the time of Henry VIII. that then it had been given, in consequence of a litigation ^ to the fifteenth Earl of Oxford, and had, after being in the possession of various : persons ^

jtillitcame into the immediate line; of the Ancafler familythat.

Ion the death of the late Duke of Ancafler, his fillers were

I ’ *. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... ' his

PARLIAMENTARY. A. 1781.

Iiis co - heirs, and the eldest had applied by petition to his Majesty to be allowed to hold the office, and to appoint a deputy; three other claimants had started up to contest this right with her, and these were the Earl Percy, the Duchefs Dowager of Athol, the present Duke of Ancaster, and his brother. Lord Robert ' Bertie; his Majesty had very properly referred their several claims to that House, for their advice in what manner lie should dispose of the Chamberlain’s staff; and upon a reference to the learned Judges, whether in the courts below, the claims of Earl Percy and the Duchefs Dowager of Athol, would not be barred by the statute of limitation, they had delivered their opinions that they were barred; even if this had not been the case, there were other reasons which, in his mind, would operate powerfully against their claims to this office. Their Lordftlips would then tome down to the case of Lady Willoughby and her lifter, and consider what resolution they should adopt upon it. He for his own part coincided entirely with the learned Judges, in the general tenor of the report they had delivered, but was not quite made up in his Opinion whether or no a Commoner of any degree could be legally deputed to the exercise of this employment. The only example which had been adduced of its ever being held by any person under the degree of a Peer, was in the instance of Sir Thomas Erping - ham. It did not. appear, however, from any specifrc de - leription that was left upon record, that Sir Thomas could fairly be said to have ever held this office as principal at all. He had solicited leave of King Henry IV. to administer water to him upon his coronation; a request which was ac - quiefeed in by his Majesty; and as this was one of the official duties of the Great Chamberlain, an inference had been drawn frorifthis fa£i, that Sir Thomas mull have been at that time in the actual possession of the employment itfelf. Fourteen years, however, after the period when he had executed this part of the Chamberlain’s duty, an occasion arose to dele ri be Sir Thornas with all his true titles and dignities, which de/erriptionbad been transmitted to pofterity, and it mentioned him only as the Deputy Great Chamberlain of England. The effect of this lingle instance was of courie destroyed, and the nature of the office was of that kind, the duties of it requiring the holder to accompany the King into that House, and to alfume even precedency among their Lordftlips, that he was strongly disposed to think that the execution of it could not legally be deputed to any one below the rank of Baron.

That,

A, tyBt. JDEBATESi

fhat, however, would in a considerable degree depend upofl the will of his Majesty, whose approbation constituted a necessary eftential in the appointment His Lordfltip concluded with informing their Lordships that he. would pro - pofe a motion to them, in reply to the meflage which had been sent to them by the King j which he laid, would consist principally in recommending it to his Majesty to be directed by the opinion which had been delivered upon ' this subje£b by the learned Judges.

In the long course of descent, upwards of ftx hundred years, no instance had occurred in which the office had been claimed by females, except in the case of the Countess of Derby $ but that case did not apply here, though the office had in some instapces been transmitted by female descent; such being the case of Lord Willoughby of Erefby, son to Lady Willoughby, the first of the Bertie family ( who was seised of the office ) which Lady Erefby claimed as heir general to her cousin, Henry the eighteenth Earl of Oxford, the last of the Vere family who possessed the office. The only difficulty which now struck him therefore was, how the office could be executed ? It certainly could not be executed by a woman, much lefs by two. The Ladies were consequently to appoint a deputy. It had hitherto been executed by a Peer, except in the nngle instance of Sir Thomas de Erpingham, and the first grantee, who was certainly of no higher rank than a Commoner; but neither of those precedents came np fully to the point. In a question therefore, which was hot clearly or satisfactorily supported by precedent, so as to eft ^ r - blish the rule clearly and unequivocally, he prefumed it would be more prudent for their. Lordships to draw up an address to his Majesty, fiating their approbation of the opinion, - of the Judges, and Submitting to his Majesty’s wifdom, in what manner, and by whom, said office was to be executed.

A report was drawn in pursuance of his Lord ship’s motion, nearly in the fame terms of the Judges opinion. Agreed to, and ordered to be presented to his Majesty. The House adjourned tp Monday the 28.

May. 28.

Private business. No debate.

May 29.

Public business in course,. No, debate *

VOL. I. Q. q

As

298

- PA RLIAME NT ARY

A. 1781 ^

As Toon as the private business was over, the order of the day being read, for committing the foul - salt bill, Lord Ld. Dudley, Dudley begged leave to submit to the House a - few words Which he had to say on that subject. He then in a shorl; speech animadverted on the great importance of the bill then before the House, and viewing it in ' that light, thought it would be proper to poftpone the committing until the first Tuesday after the recefs, that their Lordships might have full time to consider the nature of the intended act. His Lord - ftiip laid, it was very poflible he might be deceived as well in the opinion he had formed as the information he had received, in respect to the probable future efte&s of the bill : He was, however, certain that an immenfe sum of money at present Went out of the kingdom to Spain for that article \ which the present bill was specially calculated to keep within the kingdom. It was therefore his Wilh, that their Lord - ' ships should fully consider the matter, and for that purpose

he moved, that the bill he committed for the first Tuesday after the recefs.

EatlFfmrrf. - Earl Ferrers opposed the principle of the bill, which he said was a mere ideal scheme of benefit to the kingdom, with a - certainty, in his opinion, of doing an injury to the public. He said that he spoke from experience in the business; and he was confident, neither the bill before their Lordships, nor one of a similar nature, now under consideration in the other •House, could in any measure serve the nation. They might, indeed, do a benefit to some individuals; and, the noble Lord said, that he was himself one of those individuals. His Lord - ship therefore moved, as an amendment to Lord Dudley’s motion, that instead of the words, first Tuesday after the recefs; it fho. uld be inserted, this day three months. The House divided, and the coritems went belpw the bar : among whom were Lord Stormont, and all the Bishops present. For the amended motion 23; against it 14. Majority 9. The bill therefore was thrown out.

1 The second order of the day. Was then read, for com mitting ' the bill for preventing the Profanation of the Sabbath - Day, which brought up the Earl of Abingdon ^ who lpoke to the following effect

My Lords, the bill that is now under the - contemplation of this House, ( the Sunday bill I think it is called ) is, in my mind’s eye, so truly ridiculous, at the fame time. jt appears so very serious; it partakes so much of tragi - comedy; it so

- ' ' ’ ' stalks

Earl of Abingdvn,

A. 178z. : DEBATES.

stalks in buskin, whilft it skips in fock, that really, my Lords, although a member of this House, I know not what part to take; whether to be merry or grave, whether to be silent of ' ipeak, and yet to play the mute upon such an occasion, were not only to play the fool with one’s self, but to encourage the folly of others.

For, my Lords, taking a view of this "bill in its ridiculous light, what is the object ? It is neither more nor lefs than this; to hinder people from walking and from talking on - a Sunday night, not because walking and talking on a Sunday night is at present unlawful, but because walking and talking on a Sunday night must be made unlawful for the future; and this seems to be the whole obje£l, feope, and tendency of the bill.

But now, my Lords, let us esquire a little into the grounds and foundation of this bill; and hi - fi as to the walking part of it, what is the case there ? The case, as I underhand it to be, is this.

Sunday being in this country, as in all other Christian countries, the day of otium cum dignitate, the day of rest, with the dignity that belongs to that rest; the day when people wafh and clean themselves, and, as the saying is, put on their Sunday’s best; and there being in this metropolis feme, who having so ' washed and cleaned themselves, and put on their Sunday’s best, are willihg to enjoy this. otium cum dignitatet not by walking al fresco on a Sunday evening, left their Sunday’s best be spoiled by the rain, but under cover; not < e all by the pale light of the moon, ” but by candlelight, when women and linen are said to look best; I say this being the case, it has been therefore thought proper for the accommodation of this description of persons, that the large and elegant ftiite of apartments at Carlisle - House, in Soho - square, should be opened on a Sunday evening, where the refrefhments of ices are provided to cool the hot, and tea, coffee, and chocolate, to warm the cold; for it is not pretended that any other refrefhments are to be had there; but walking being the omne quod exit in um of that placej the thing itfelf has, euphon ' ue gratia, obtained the name of Promenade, and this 1 take to be the whole. of the case with respe£l to the walking part of this bill, the whole of the charge, and the whole, of the crime in the thing charged. But, my Lords, if there be, as it appears by this bill that there is, such a degree of criminality in a Promenade on a Sunday evening, it is wonderful to me that this bill has

Q » < J 2; not

PARLIAMENTARY A. 78 *

not extended ' its clauses to the Promenades of St. James’s Park, and of Keniington Gardens; Promenades, where indeed the refreshment of ices, and of coffee, tea, and chocolate, may not be had, but where other refrefhments are actually had, and especially on a Sunday evening; such as, for example, the refreshment of repoling one’s self on the lap of nature, infomuch as to make visible that tell - tale line of the song, tc Green was her gown upon the grass. ” And as to the fin of walking, there it is had in much greater excess than at Carlisle - House, not to mention that there is lefs fin in a fin for being under cover, ' as at Carlisle - House, than for being uncovered, as in St, James’s Park and in Keniington Gardens.

I mull now wonder too, my Lords, that this bill has not gone a Hep farther, and taken notice of a late erection i in Pall - Mall; an erection, for the outward impurities of j which, the newspapers say, the ereftor ( I think he calls himself Dr. Graham ) has been already indi£ted, whilft the inward impurities remain untouched.

But to this wonder I am aware of the arguments in answer. It will be said, that this erection is not intended for ufe on a Sunday; and, as Milton tells us in his Comus, i{ It is day - light only that makes fin, ” so in this bill wc find that it is Sunday only that makes fin; it is intended for the great, and not for the little; for the aristocracy, •and not for the democracy : for us, my Lords, to generate heirs for the nobility, who cannot do so for themselves [ and for you, my Lords, the Bishops too, as a paper which I have in my hand will Ihevv; the paper, my Lords, is this

TEMPLE of HYMEN.

. Intelligence extraordinary,

A certain Bilhop has lo completely exercised the celestial beds, that the evil spirits are expelled to depart in a few days. The rooms will be fumigated with brimstone, in order to the well - receiving of the would - be celestial. The Do&oj has wifely opened his temple vis - a - vis to King’s Place; that pure seminary is to serve as barracks fop young recruits. Colonels Windfoi *, Matthews, and Adams, are to be mtide staff - officers, and Carotty Kitty is to be drill - serjeant; they will learn their celestial exercise under the Do&or’s own inspection, and be cleansed from all impurities ! they will then be ready for the divine touch in his

heavenly

A, tjfBt D E B A - T; E; S « s -

heavenly temple. N. B. A proper‘ reinforcement of Irifl diairmen are in pay to alfift in case of emergencies.

. Such, my Lords, are the operations of this Temple of Hymen, or, in other words, of this curious house of adultery : but in this there is no fin : for first, these operations are the operations of lying, in which there is no haring and not of walking, in which there is; secondly, they are the performances of a week - day, and not of a Sunday; and thirdly, because we all well know, that what is a fin in the little, is not a fin in the great. As for instance, the Minister being a great man, may by his councils murder our once fellovv - subjects in America; lie may rob and plunder the State of its treafure, he may tear up the constitution by the roots. “ But Brutus is an ' honourable man, ” and Brutus will have a dead majority, and being dead, a corrupt majority in both Houses of Parliament, to support these his honourable measure. s : whereas a little man, for walking under cover of a Sunday night instead of the open air, is, because a little man, to be put by the fame dead and corrupt majority under the rigour and the lafh. of a penal statute, making that a crime, which in itfelf is innocence.

But now, my Lords, a word or two for the talking part of this bill, and what is the case here ? Some men, pious men I may lay, for aught is shewn to the contrary, fonder of talking than they are. of, walking, and not choosing to go to bed on a Sunday night without digesting, by reason what they had swallowed in the course of the day as a matter of faith, congregate themselves on a. Sunday evening at a place, where paying six - pence a piece for arlmilfion, they empty their heads of their metaphysics, and fill them bellies with the value of their six - pence in porter and cheese. An harmlefs supper this would leem, and not likely to be very offenfive in the digestion. But here again, my Lords, if the fin of talking, as of walking, consists in the day and not in the deed, what is the reason that this bill does not extend itfelf to the Sunday - night clubs about St. James’s : as for instance, to Brookes’s where indeed I am not a member, but where, my Lords as I am told, the members pay more than six - pence a piece for their supper; and as to talking, Lord, how they do talk, ! they talk bawdy, my Lords, and sometimes heterodoxy but hot blasphemy; no, not so bad as that neither; but they talk what is worfe than all, they talk politics, They abyfe the Minister at a great rate ;

P A R L I A M E N T A R Y A. 1781

they say he has ruined the resources, and blasted the national honour of the country. '

And shall these be sufferdd to talk against the state, whilft those are not permitted even. to talk upon the affairs of the church ! No, no, fays the bill, be not miftaken. This is not our ne plus ultra, pass me ' into an aft, give me the principle of the bill in ' a law, suffer me to put down the theologians this fession of Parliament, and I will take care of the politicians the next. You shall hear of no more West - mi nfter or other committees : no more associations : no more petitions : the state shall be as much out of the reach of enquiry as the church. The late edict of Ruffia, forbidding the Ruffians to talk over the affairs of; the state, shall become, like this, an aft of the English Parliament, forbiddingEnglishmen to talk about the affairs of the church; which leads me, my Lords, to take a view of this bill in its serious light; and as ia its ridiculous light I might say, rifurn tcnatis amici t I might add, “ £h < is taliu fando, temperet a la - crymis ? ” For, my Lords, shall - a free body possess a free mind ? Shalt not Englishmen be suffered to find his own way to heaven ! Shall he not dispute ? shall he not debate ? shall he not debate ? ftfell he not doubt of ? shall he not comment upon that which is to be or not to be the means of his : eternal salvation ? How is fire to be drawn from the flint but by collision ? And how is truth to be known but by discussion ? Shall he not meafu e his faith of the trinity by the rule of his reason ? And shall not a protester against the errors of the church of Rome, examine whether Protestantism or Popery is moil congenial to the freedom of the state in which he lives ? For these it feeins are the thefes against which the thunder of this bill is levied.

But it is said, the Uniyerfities are at the bottom of this bill; it was brought into the House of Commons by one of the representatives of one University, and seconded by another representative of the other; and therefore,

ee What learning distates reason muftobey. ”

But, my Lords, this is no argument with me; for we all know, that to hold men in ignorance is sometimes the bufi - nei ' s of learning; and therefore, although I have the highest respect for the learning of the Universities, all is not gospel with ' me that comes from them; if it were, educated where I was in one of them, I ought to entertain principles very different from those I profels. With respect to one part of this bill, however, I tpean the walking part of it, poffibly

4 the

)

A. 1781. DEBATES. 3 ? 3

the Universities might have conqeived it a fit object of regulation; for being devoted to the study of the dead languages, and not lb conversant with the living, they might have supposed that the term Promenade meant something more than it really does, that it was the mere covering only of original fin; and therefore ought to be suppre. fled; but as to the talking part of the bill, in this they could not be miftaken.

This came within the pale of their own knowledge; and here, my Lords, te latettt < znguis in berba; ” here it is that one fees the cloven foot peeping from under the caffbck.

Under the pretence of profanation, enquiry is to be flopped, and truth to be suppreffed. The unlearned are not to examine, left they become learned. Truth lies in a well, and the clergy are to be the only buckets to supply us therewith.

This, so far as it goes, is the principle of this bill, a principle as subversive of religious, as it may be made instru - mentally so of civil liberty; a principle as repugnant to the free constitution of this country as it is to the laws of our nature.

And, therefore, as Mr. Locke tells us, “ No man is bound to obey the legislature, but according to the trust put in it. ”

So, according to this just and fundamental principle of Mr.

Locke, this bill should not pass into a law. No pofitive law can supprefs the laws of nature; nor is any act of Par4 liament binding, which is to take from Englishmen the rights of Englishmen; that is to say, the rights of the constitution.

• My Lords, I shall give my hearty negative to the bill, for the fake of its folly as well as its wickednefsi

The Bishop of Chester got up, and said that the noble Lord’s Biftop of speech was so indecent and so very repugnant to the dignity Chester of the House, that he thought it unworthy a reply. The learned Prelate observed, that he did intend, if any thing serious was advanced, to answer it, but in the present case, he left the noble Earl’s arguments, if they could be called so, to their own demerits; for merits they had none.

The Duke of JHanchester quoted a number of statutes, in Duke of which many penal laws were enacted to prevent the profa - nation of the Lord’s day; statutes which, his Grace said, if put in force, would have answered every honest purpose of the present bill. His Grace spoke very feriouily on its religious tendency, and seemed to think, that however high the autho - ! rity of the pulpit might be held, yet mankind were never to be convinced of religious assertions without the benefit of reply

was

PARUAME N TARY A.. 1781 ;

. was allowed, and that one neighbour had the liberty of con, verling with another on the subject of that faith by which he Was to be laved. His Grace farther obferyed, that although he was an enemy to diiftpation and immorality, and although h ? never had been at the Promenade, yet - he still considered both the places of religious debate; and of Sunday walking and drinking tea, perfe£tly innocent. He"therefore wiilied, that the bill might be got rid of in as decent a manner as polhble, and that another on a more libera ] plan. might be framed, to which he would give his most hearty concurrence.

The Bjshop of Chester said, that the noble Duke’s Ipeech eJ ^ ’ demanded and was entitled to {erious reply. He therefore informed their Lordships, that he apprehended the noble Duke to be miftaken in his idea respecting the nature of the bill : For it was only meant to prevent that irreligion which our Protestant ancestors abhorred, but the laws to effect which were found inadequate to the purpose. He said, that instead of this favouring of popifh perfecution it was levelled at popifli customs; France, and other countries of the fame religion, tolerated from the principles of that religion, plays, operas, and other paftimes on the Lord’s - day. But the Protestant religion, founded on the Protestant constitution and our cieareft rights, did not permit that profanation, and therefore every law to serve that purpose invift be truly constitutipnal. The learned Prelate averred, that the places of public debate were supported not for the purpose of fe. rvipg religion, but for the pecuniary advantage of the proprietors; and that the people who spoke there were paid a weekly stipend, for the purpose of drawing others to the house. This, he said, he averred from the best information; and that he had also the highell law - authorities, as well as information from the Justices, that there were not now any act in force, to prevent that profanation of the Lord’s day, which the present bill meant to provide against.

The question was then. put, whether the bilifhould be committed, and the House divided. Contents 29; non - contents 3. Majority 26.

The bill was ordered to be committed the first Tuesday after the recefs.

The report on the bill, for making an exchange of, hands between the Archbishop - of Canterbury and the : Earl of Radnor was received .; and a motion being made that said. re - The Lord port be now received, the Lord Chancellor came from the cianiukr. and made along and very able speech against agree -

' ing

A. t ? 8t. ‘ DEBATES,

ing with said report, in which he confined himself to two special points, the neceflity of the most full and correct speci - fication of the lands to be commuted or interchanged; and that the equivalents on both fides be such, as to satisfy the whole world, who might think fit to esquire, that what was received was equal to what was parted with. — - This was necessary, in every bill, for a change or barter of property; but it became doubly fb, when the patrimony of the Church was concerned; because, the person in possession, had but a life or transient estate in the property, which he changed.

He was well satisfied, in his own mind, that the most reverend Prelate, who was one of the contracting parties to the present proposed agreement, would be as careful and as anxious for the preservation of those intereffs committed to his care and guardianship as if the property was vefted in himself, so as to enable him to devise, or otherwise dispose of the fame; but it was the example, not the particular bill under consideration, which chiefly induced him to rife to oppofe it : —• because, it would establish a precedent, and a precedent the more dangerous, as it would have the sanction of the highest authority in the Church.

His Lordship next proceeded to descant upon the bill itfelf; pointing out, in a variety of instances its defects, particularly that want of corrednefs, necessary where the value of landed property was to be fairly and equitably ascertained.

A short conversation arose between his Lordship, the most reverend Prelate, and the Earl of Radnor; which ended in a mutual agreement, that said bill be recommitted for the first : day after the recefs.

The House rofe at seven o ’ clock, and adjourned to Tuesday sevennight, the 12th of June.

June 12.

This day the House met pursuant to their adjournment, previous to the Whitfun recefs, and proceeded to the dif - patch of business.

Counfel were called to ' the bar, to be heard in behalf of T. Fleming, ‘ esq. claiming the title of Earl of Wigton, in Scotland.

Several witnesses were called, to prove the fads fiated by the petitioners counsel. The, evidence was to the following purport.,

Vol. I. R t

That

3o6 PAULI AMENT ARY A. 1781.

That the late Earl of Wigton was a native of Ireland; but on the death of the preceding Earl he laid claim to the peerage, which was admitted; that, in consequence thereof, lie affirmed the title and arms, and was publicly received in both, kingdoms as Earl of Wigton; that he walked at the coronation as a Peer of Scotland, and had a stipend from Government, to enable him to support his rank.

The registers of this branch of the family, settled in Ireland, were0 produced; by the first, as well as articles of inter - mariage, it appeared, that the ancestor of the late Earl, who first settled in Ireland, was a younger brother of the then Earl of Wigton. The Register likewise proved, that the present claimant was the eldest, and only surviving foa of the late Earl.

Several other collateral proofs were offered, and a de - pofitory of old writings produced, by a female relation of the family, which served to corroborate and confirm several ©f the foregoing facts.

The Lord Chancellor and Earl Mansfield asked fbme questions, relative to farther proofs of the authenticity of the papers, which the counsel nor agent did not leein prepared to answer.

TheSoIiciicr The Solicitor General of Scotland, who was counsel against

Scotland ^ claimant, said, that the lefiion was so far advanced, that he feared he should not receive all the necessary documents from his client time enough to make out his case between this and the prorogation.

After a short consultation at the table, the farther hearing was adjourned Jine die and the claimant ’ s, case it was settled should be taken up de yiovo the ensuing feffiom Adjourned.

June i3.

Private and public business, in course. No debate.

June 14.

The Bp. of The private business being finished, the Bishop of St.

St. David ' s 2 moved, that the Houi ' e do refblve itfelf into a com -

mittee, to take the Sunday - bill into consideration.

The Earl of The Earl of Abingdon rofe, and addressed their Lordships

A ' Angdtn. to the following effect :

My Lords, ' '

Having already delivered my sentiments to the House upon the subjedfc matter of this bill, it is not my intention

to

A. 17S1. DEBATES.. -

to trouble your Lordships with, any repetition of them; but, at the fame time that I say this, I mull take the liberty of adding, that I can by no means suffer this bill to pass through this House, without, in every stage of it, repeating my oppolition and giving my negative to it. In the present moment then, I rife to obje£t to its commitment; and this I do, my Lords, not in consequence of the arguments that have been offered against the bill, but in consequence of the want of argument that has been had in the support of it.

In objecting to this bill, upon the former occasion alluded to, I treated it as I thought it deserved; I treated it lu - dicrously, I treated it with gravity : I treated it ludicroufly, for < e ridicule ( lays my Lord Shaftefbury ) is the tell of truth. ” I treated it with gravity, that it might meet the gravity of the House : but having failed in that pofitive mode of attack, this negative kind of opposition may now poffibly prove more effectual.

I say, my Lords, having failed, for the right reverend Prelate, who has adopted this spurious offspring, and means to legitimate it, by confounding" the gravity of my arguments with the ridicule of them, and, by a curious kind of logic suited to the purpose, not only triumphed in his conclusions of giving no answer either to the one or the other, but had reason to triumph too in the majority which he obtained on the occasion. Indeed, knowing the high consequence of that. right reverend Prelate, as well as the high opinion he entertains of himself, I expected nothing other than this from him : but the right reverend Prelate will give me leave to tell him, however he may boaffc of his viftory within theie walls, he will find his victory without these walls pretty much like the late victory of Lord Cornwallis in America. : a victory that has ended in a retreat, and in the publication of a ridiculous proclamation ( like this bill ) which nobody minds, which nobody reads, and which everybody holds in contempt.

But, my Lords, ' although it was not in my power to call up the right reverend Prelate to deliver his adopted child out of the hands either of ridicule or gravity, it gave me much pleasure to find, that the House was not deprived of hearing what the right reverend Prelate had to say in behalf of this adoption; for being called up by what fell from a noble Duke, [ Manchester3 he was then pleased to fiate what he had to offer in support of this bill, and it is to the paucity and

R r 2 futility

P AR LI A ME NT ' A R Y <. A. 1781,

futility of the arguments that were then adduced by the right reverend Prelate himself, that I now rest my oppofitioti to the farther proceeding upon this bill. What those arguments were, their fecency renders it unnecessary for; me to state. But, why do I call them arguments ? I will appeal to the House whether any thing, that was said by the right reverend Prelate, had the shadow 6r colour of argu ment in it; or, if it had, whether it was not in direct oppo - lition to the bill. The right reverend Prelate said, that in Roman Catholic countries, plays, operas, and other paftimes were admitted on a Sunday; but in Protestant countries they were not. But for what re ' afon are they not to be admitted in Protestant countries ? Does the right reverend Prelate know the wifdom and the policy of that measure J Does he not know, that the first and fundamental object of all government is, or ought to be, that the people of that government should be rightly employed ? ' How much better is it, therefore, that people should be suffered to come ' to ? gether of a Sunday evening, under the eye and policy of i their government, to be amused by entertainments, in which there is no moral turpitude, than to be left to go. a whoring after their own imaginations, and in the commission of a£to, which are not only contra horns mores, but which neither the eye, nor policy of any government, can remedy or prevent. Another thing the right reverend Prelate said, was, that he had the highest law authorities to assert, ' that there was no law in force to prevent that which this aft meant to provide against. Gan there be a more decided argument against this bill ? Will ' any law authority say, will his Majesty’s Solicitor - General, the Representative of the TJniverlity of Cam - ' bridge, say, that if these were disorderly meetings, that if I any thing occurred at them, which was contrary to the peace and good order of society, that there are not laws in being, and laws in abundance too, in every respect. full and suficient, not only to punish the offence, but to remedy the evil ? What does the bill itfelf say. ? It fays, that the Dcclefiastical Courts have themselves power to ' punish these pffences, and provides, that this jurisdiction should not be altered or abridged by the passing of this bill into an aft. What then is the obvious purpose of this bill ? It is to make that. a crime, which is at present neither malum prohibitum, nor malum in / ?, and to furnish punishments for pffences, for which, if offences, it is admitted, punishments 3i : e already tp be Jiad ?

A. 1781. D E BAT E S *

Upon the whole my Lords for What the right - revfereftd Prelate has said, as well for what he has not said, I trust, if there were no other, reasons, your *. Lordships will be Of opinion, - that as this bill does not merit, so it will not have, any farther the countenance an. d sanction of this House.

Before I fit down, my Lords, I will add one word more, as from myfelf, in argument against this bill : I have before taken notice of this bill in its ridiculous and in its serious light; but there is another light in which I wish to view it, and that is, in its hypocritical light. - When I fee that right, reverend Prelate, ' and almost the whole of that right reverend Bench, voting ! for putting tomoha > vks and scalping - knives into the hands of savages to perpetrate murder iri its horrideft extreme when I fee them ( Protestanfc bishops, ) voting for crucifixes to perpetuate and establish Popery in America, in order that Popery may establish defpotism in the Crown; when I fee them addressing his Majesty, and in their address not only asserting the war with America to be just and necessary, but, ( as a species of peace - offering, acceptable enough to the king of men, but from them, as ministers of the gospel, not quite so - acceptable to the King of kings, ) “ praifing God for every victory that has a tendency to the blessings of peace praifing# God for the shedding of human blood; for, such is the obje£t of their prayer : I say, my Lords, when I fee these things, what must I think of this bill ? What mufl I think of it, but as a jneafure intended to throw dust into the eyes of the people; as calculated to draw off the public attention from those that, are above and place it on those that are below; to make the world believe, that the fin is not in them, but that the wickednefs lieth in the people : that the shepherds would save their flock, but that their flock will not be saved : that they are busied in good. works, in their watchfulnefs and care over the morality, the virtue, and religion of the state; when at the fame time they are on the contrary"employed in upholding, maintaining, and supporting, with all their heart, with all their foul, and with all their might, the moffc corrupt, the most profligate, and the most abandoned administration, that ever cursed the Government of this or any Other country upon the face of God’s earth.

Such, my Lords, in my view of this bill, and such my ideas upon this subjeff, and now I have but a single word ? » ore to add. When that right reverend bench will pull out

the

310

PARLIAMENTARY A.

the beams that are in their own eyes, that they may fee more clearly the mote that are in their brethrens, they will ileadfaftly meet with my support; until then, my Lords, my honour calls upon me to be, and to remain their firm de < termined opponent.

The Bishop of St. David replied, by observing, that, if his Lordship had said any thing new, or had treated the fub - je£l with a becoming degree of gravity and seriousness, he would have endeavoured to have given him an answer; but as no new arguments had been advanced by his Lordship, he should not take up the tjme of the House in answering them, and especially as they were of too ludicrous a kind to de. serve an answer from a member of that House.

The Lord Chancellor now quitted the woolfack, and the bill being sent to a committee. Lord Sandys, as chairman of it, went to the table, when Earl of The Earl of Abingdon role a second time, and said, your

j&vtgdrt. Lordships having thought fit to fend this bill to a committee, my next struggle mufl - be, as I cannot do away its wicked - nefs, to lelien, if possible, for the honour of this House, the degree of its folly, and therefore my Lords, in order to this, I shall beg leave to trouble your Lordships with one or two amendments.

The first amendment, my Lords, is of the title - page of the bill; which being < e A Bill for preventing certain abuses and profanations on the Lord’s - day, called Sunday; ” I would wish, after the word ec profanations, ” to insert the words ( as well ) and after the word Sunday, to add the following words, ( as on the other days of the week ), and then the title will run thus : < c A Bill for preventing certain abuses and profanations, as well on the Lord’s - day, called Sunday, as on the other days of the week. ” And to this amendment, my Lords, I am led by the preamble of the bill itfelf; for it is there said, that cc Debates having frequently been held on the evening of the Lord’s - day, concerning divers texts of holy feripture, by persons unlearned and incompetent to explain the fame, to the corruption of good morals, and to the great encouragement of irreligion and profanenefsand therefore, my Lords, if this be true that debates held on the evening of ' the Lord’s day ( as described ) are to the corrupr tion of good morals, and to the great encouragement of irreligion and profanenefs, debates ( of the fame description ) held on any other evening, mufl neceffarily produce the fame effectfr; and if the fame effects are produced on any other

evening,

A. 1781. DEBATE 5.

svening, as Well as on a Sunday evening, it is equally incumbent upon us to remedy those effects; and if it be equally incumbent upon us to remedy those evils, it follows according to the rules of found reason, as well as of found logic, that my amendment stands without objection. Poffibly indeed, it may be said, knowing the power of the legislature to pass an aft for every day in the week, when the occasion [ hall call for it; and how easy a thing it is to multiply laws, that this law may prevent the other fix from being enacted; but in answer to this, I am to inform your Lordships ( as I am instrufted ), that these profaners, determined - upon their profanations, and to evade this aft, have already agreed upon Monday instead of Sunday evening to hold their future meetings; and therefore, my Lords, that we might not be outwitted by these sinners, I hold it best that we should prevent them at once, and by this bill, from debating upon any subject whatsoever ( as the bill now enacts ) upon any day whatsoever, ' and by this means give them a proof that we have at leaft as much wit as they have.

With respect, my Lords, to the debates of these men upon the alteration of their meeting from Sunday evening to Monday evening, they were so curious, that I cannot help giving your Lordships some account of them. It was firffc of all moved, that Saturday evening should be the time of meeting, instead of Sunday; and in support of this time, in preference to any, other, it was argued, that the next day being Sunday, when it was not necessary for them to go to work, they could not only lie in bed all the day, and rest themselves, but by so doing, spite the Bench of Bishops by not going to church. To this it was answered, that Saturday being the Jews ’ labbath, and the Jews being rich, and the state poor, the Jews might give the Minister a sum of money to prevent this meeting on Saturday evening, as had been done on Sunday; but here in reply it was argued, that the Jews being rich, and the state poor, when the Minister wanted the money of the Jews, he would take it as he had done the money of the East - India Company, by the omnipotence of an aft of Parliament, and without any agreement at all; which removing the objection to Saturday evening, it was then contended by way of rejoinder, that Saturday evening was, according to the books of Doemanomania, ( books which the right reverend Prelates are. no doubt acquainted with ) the Sabbath of the witches; that these witches, to prepare, themselves for this meting, take certain soporific

‘ drugs.

Zarl of jSbingdtn,

The Lord Prcjsdent.

Bishop of

St. David ' s

. PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

drugs, that then the devil appeared before them in the form. of a goat, around which they make several dances and magic ceremonies, and afterwards fly away up the chimney upon a switch; and this it seems, my Lords, put the company in such a fright, that they all, una voce, agreed to change their meeting from Saturday evening to Monday evening. I hope, my Lords, I have said enough to induce your Lordships to adopt the amendment I have proposed; and if so, the next amendment will of courife be, that the, words < 6 or upon any day whatsoever ’ 7 be made follow after the word “ Sunday, 77 in the first enacting clause, and whenever else they may be required.

The foregoing amendments were read in their order by the Chairman, and negatived; when the Earl of Abingdon rofe again, and said, my Lords, my amendments being rejected, I have now ah entire clause to propofe, a clause of prQviso, and it is this

( i Provided also, that this act does not extend, nor be construed to extend to ' Quakers ’ Meetings on a Sunday evening, inafmuch as these meetings being silent meetings, they cannot in any lenfe be. laid to fall under the meaning and intention of this act. ” -

This clause being also negatived, the bill was committed; and ordered to be read a third time.

The order of the day being read, for receiving the report of the committee on the bill for inclosing the parish of Kington, " in the county of Worcester, and the several amendments agreed to in the committee being read.

The Lord President stated to the House the particular effect of the clause relative to tythes, as altered by the amendment; and after explaining in what particulars it had hitherto been held adviseable to prpvide for the clergy in cases of inclo - sure, laid he must object to the amendment of the committee, since it effectually overthrew the clause, as it Hood before the bill was committed.

The Bl/h ' of of St. Davidrs began with observing, that he was present at the committee when the bill was considered; and though one of the amendments which he proposed had been adopted, yet as he had several others to make, which he thought equally necessary; and as the Lords of the committee were not pleased to accept them, he was obliged now to trouble the House.

The learned Prelate then went very largely into the whole system of tything; of - compensatigns ia lieu of tythes; of <. ' the

A. 178 *. DEBATES. 31 ;

the nature of compensations and commutations in general; and read a firing of resolutions, which ' he would recommend in future to be inserted in all inclosing bills, in order to en - sure to the reftor and vicar the real value of his tythes, to defend him against the opprefiions of the lord of the manor,, land - owners, &c. and to prevent the incumbent, for the time being, from entering into any fraudulent bargain which might prejudice, his eventual successor.

He then oblefved, that he had flated the substance of the amendments, which he hoped to have an opportunity of ptopofing. He confessed that many of these clauses were new, and different from the clauses which had been hitherto inserted in bills of this kind, but how expedient and how highly necessary they all were, his Lordship said, would soon be made to appear in the cleared and ablefbmanner.

He concluded with observing, that as nothing was in - - tended by these amendments, but to provide that equal justice was done to all parties, - and to take c&re, that as ' (. mdch was given to a fnan in one way, as was taken from him in another, he could entertain no doubt but that their Lordships, as friends to justice, would agree with him in ordering the bill to he recommitted *

Lord Sandys said a few words in reply, and particularly Ld. SarJyu with, regard to the clause, the reverend Prelate had declared his intention to move to have inserted, which gave the clergyman a right to appeal from the decifibn of the Commissioners, appointed by the aft to settle the compensation to be made to him in lieu of tythes. His Lordship said, that clause would terrify persons in the country, and frighten them from inclosing; for who would choose to have a fuitof law hanging perpetually over his head.

The Lord Chancellor role, and observed, the argument he The lord had always heard in that House and elsewhere was, that itCifl"ce ^ r was right to make the value of the tythes up to the clergyman by a commutation either of land, a corn - rent, or in some other way. With regard to a corn - rent, his Lordship Hated that to be, in his opinion, the fairest Commutation ' that could poflibly be adopted. Commutation of land for tythes he did not so much admire, because in that case three parts of every parcel of land inclosed, nay in some four or even five, in proportion to the state of culture, must, in order to make a : fair and equitable commutation, go to the minister and rest in mortmain ^. by which means, in length Vol, I S s of -

314 PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781,

of t ^ me, a great proportion of the kingdom would be in mortmain. His. Lordship said, what had been stated to the Hpufe by the noble Earl who opened the debate, relative to the amended, elause, was the strongeft argument for the recommitment of the bill that could poffibly be adduced; for the noble Earl had expressly stated that the elause did not give the clergyman a fair commutation, but merely calculated what the tythes were worth hitherto, and upon that ) and that only, made him up a so ' mething in lieu of them. This was in itfelf so unjuft, that he was perfuaded the House would not fnfFer it to pass in that form.

Lord Lord Sandwich laid, notwithstanding he had the misfor -

Sandzvirf >. tune to differ from the first authorities, and from men to whom he Jook ^ d up with admiration, yet with regard to inclosure bills, he could not give up his opinion. What that was the House well knew, for he had delivered it on a former occasion. He had since that time examined his Own mind, in order to fee if he could find any fallacy in the ideas upon which his opinion ' refted, and he found none. He had also lince that time conversed with a great variety of persons, upon the subject, and they had all agreed with him, that the

eafielt, the most certain, and satisfactory compensation for tythes, was that which had been adopted in almost every inclosure bill that hacj passed both Houses of Parliament, viz, commutation of land. So perfe£ ! ly convinced was he of this, that not all the eloquence nor all the abilities of the most powerful orators could induce him to change his opinion. There had now, his Lordship fai ' d, been near nine, hundred inclosure bills passed; in every one of which almost commutation of land was the mode adopted, and he had never heard the leaft complaint, whatever; he wondered therefore to what pew formed opinion, to what sudden im - pulfe of zeal, these attempts at innovation were to be imputed. He must and would refill them whenever they were made. He profeffed himself a friend to inclosure bills .; those that had passed he was confident had been of efferitial service to the public; and so satisfied. was he, that the more inclosure bills the better, that as far as his poor abilities would enable him; he would suppbrt every inclosure bill that should be brought into the House. His Lordship, speaking of tythes, said, their being abolished gave peace and happinefs to the country; and as to corn - rents, they fnade persons estates : appear larger, than they really were; whereas commutation ! by land settled the matter at once,

.. His

A. 1781. DEBATES.. - 31

His Lordship concluded with objecting to the recommitment of the bill. 1

The Lord, Chancellor replied that nothing could be more The Lori unfortunate for the cause of justice, than when a propo - ChanceJUr. fition was objected to, for those who; opposed it, in stead of meeting it fairly in a direct and manly way, to draw in a number of topics extraneous to the subject matter, and in a general stile of reasoning to call the attention of the House. to those foreign topics. Such he observed was the noble Earl’s mode of debating the present question, which was not whether the tythes of the parfon should be compensated for by a commutation of land, or a corn - rent, but whether the compensation held out by the, bill, a compensation founded on a calculation a retro9 was the fort of compensation which their Lordships would hold to be adequate to the case in question. In arguing this “point, he appealed to the House, whether saying “ I am a friend; to inclosure bills, and 1 will support them, ” had any, 1 the smallest reference whatever to to the subje£f ? Just the fame fort ' of reasoning it was, for the noble Earl to > say, respecting the commutation of tythes for land, that he had never heard of any complaint, although nine hundred incldfure bills had passed, and most of them in that way. To, this, would, it not be an apposite answer, and just as good reasoning for him to say, he had heard a great number of complaints, which he undoubtedly had ? One thing, his Lordship said, he must desire of those who thought differently from what he did on this or any other subject; and that was, not to suggest that fbme nevv zeal, some spirit of innovation or other, had suddenly seized him. The foie coftsideration that weighed in his mind was, whether what he aimed at was right, and consonant with strict justice. In many of their ' inclosure bills their Lord - ships had from inattention suffered what was wrong to pals, and in consequence the parties had not been done justice to, which they had a right to expect from Parliament.

His Lordship stated a variety of amendments, which he proposed to offer for the better regulation of future inclosure bills. In particular, he objected to the mode of settlement of the claim of the minister by three commissioners : he thanked God that the property of an Englishmen depended not on so loofe a tribunal in any other instance whatever. His Lordship exposed the inequitable constitution of of this tribunal by stating, that out of a pretence to do the parfon justice he had the nomination of one. commissioner,

S s 2 but

P A R L I A M E N T A R Y. A,

but at the lame time the other parties named two, so that in faCfc the Minister might as well have no nomination at all. As a proof of the iniquity practised in feme cases, his Lordship stated to the House an instance or two that had fallen, within his own knowledge.. The means of prevention, that he should propofe, were thele : to o *

blige the commissioners to take down their examinations and proceedings in - writing, in order that the party aggrieved might render them ftibject to revifal before a better aq, d more competent jurilcliCtion. To oblige them also to receive the testimony of such witnesses as the respective. parties should tender, and to take down their depofi - tions in writing, and upon oath. If either of the parties afterwards thought himself aggrieved, to re - examine the whole matter, and to slate the re - examination in writing and upon oath, in like manner as before; and then. to fuperi - ‘add a right of appeal. As the aft flood, he conceived there was an appeal to the Quarter Session. When the Quarter Session was alluded to, his Lordship remarked, it was no unusual thing to hear, that in a particular part of the country, where this and that noble Lord - ljved, thp gentlemen who came to the Quarter Session were such and such; perlbng so respectable, of charaCte ' rs so known and establifned, that they were superior to reproach. Ad this, his Lordship said, might be, and he did not doubt was strictly true in various ififtanCes, but he meant to lay the whole eqnsideration of personal character out of the question, and to speak. t6 the conflitutiom of Quarter Sessions in general; rather than to make the lead reference to individuals, either respectable or otherwise. Quarter Seffiohs $ver. e not the fort oLjurisdiCtion fit to try appeals of the nature under consideration, from the short time of their fitting, and from various other objections. But then, as a great piece of ' wit, it had been thought a mighty good turn upon him. to say,. < c What, Would you take them into West - jnirifterr - Hall ! ” He begged to know why not ? Did their Lordships think his Majesty ? s courts of law unfit to hear such appeals. Thofe courts, where the parties could be told, from authority how. the law flood !. Thofe courts, who could direct such issues as might appear ne ' cessary to be tried ! But then it had been said, 66 Going into Welt - Jninster - Hall is - expensive; you will terrify the people. from p&closures, ” Indeed ! did the noble Lords; who used these ‘ ' ' : argument ?,

... /•

A. r; 8i. ' D E B A. T E S. 317

arguments, know, that the expence of going into Westminster - Hall was so trifling on furh appeals, that it would eoft the parties no more than appealing to the Quarter,

Sefllons ? And then in order that frivolous and captious ' suits might not be brought, there, he intended to make the appellants, if they failed in their appeal, liable to double cbfts; a circumstance which would effectually put a flop to flight, idle, and ill - founded appeals.

After going through a variety of regulations, which his Lordship said he should propoie, he at length came back tq the consideration of the bill itfelf. Its principle he admitted to be right y that was on all hands agreed; what he granted was, to make the clauses come up to the principle, which in their present form, he contended they did not. His Lordship having argued this for some time said, if he failed thenj he would try again and again, for as long as he lived he would never consent to a bill’s passing imperfect as that bill was.

He knew the day would come; sooner or later, when their Lordships would agree with him upon the point in question,

? nd he did assure them, all he laboured at was to render. their legislative proceedings - as pure arid as just in every respect as every one of their Lordships were determined their judicial proceedings should be; in fad, he wanted to make, their purity at a House of Parliament equal to their high authority.

Lord Dudley said, he must object to the re - commitment; Ld. Dudley. but he did assure the noble Lord he did not mean to be witty at the expence of Westminster - Hall. He had no talents for wit, and if he had been blessed with any, he should not - "

have ventured to have employed them against the ability of •thofe who fo~ laudably filled the feat of justice in Westminster - Hall. His Lordship declared himself of the fame opinion with his noble friend £Lord Sandwich ]; he was a friend ' to iriclosures, and to commutation of land in lie ' u of tythes. " - With regard to what the learned Lord had laid of the commissioners injustice, he could only declare ^ that in the country where he lived the, commissioners had always "given satisfaCtion. They were men of character, and rrien universally respected. He proved that there was no appeal to the Quarter Selliops in the bill; and after several arguments in support of the bill, afkejl if any one of _ their Lord - iships went. into. Westminstqr - Hall, - whether he did not find it pretty expensive to come out ^ gaip ? Befides ( added his; Lordship ) Westminster - Hall. is not the end of the evil

giS PARLIAMENTARY. A. 1781.

if these appellants go there, in all probability they mud : tome here,. and appear by their counsel at. your Lordships ’ _ bar. ” [ The ' Lord Chancellor said from the wool lack, no, no > but the Lord, President and Lord Loughborough, fitting by Lord Dudley, one of them said yes. ] His Lordship said, he knew not whether he was in the right or not; great authorities were divided in opinion. '

The Ltrd The Lord Chancellor obferyed, that the argument against Chancellor, the recommitment turned out exAftly as he foretold. He had been answered as to one immaterial point, while all the rest of his argument, those parts which came neareft to, the question, were fufFered to pass unnoticed. He cau - ' tioned the House against accuftoniing themselves to hear strong objections, and without having heard them obviated, to make up their minds to vote decisively. From one point laid down by the noble Lord it was evident, that, justice as well as reason rendered the re - commitment of, the ^ bill indispensibly necessary. There was, it seemed, and he owned it had escaped him before, no appeal whatever in the bill. He conjured the House therefore, for their own honour, to make one; - or if they would not consent to that, at leaft to oblige the commissioners to take down the examinations in writing, that their proceedings might, be capable of being subject, to a revifaj, and that the party who thought himself aggrieved by their decision, might shew them the written evidence of their own acts, and be enabled to say to them, < c thus haft thou done ! ”

td. Sandys. Lord Sandys. mentioned a few words on the general idea of there being no appeal from commissioners, His Lordship instanced the commissioners of the land - tax. At length the House divided. Contents for the commitment 4; non - contents 24. Majority 20. : 1

The minority was composed of the Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Galloway > and the Bishops of Lincoln and St, David ’ s.. -

June 1$.

The bill for preventing the profanation of the Lord’s - day was read a third time, and passed.

The petition of Colonel Twiftleton, claiming the barony -, of Say and Sele, as heir - general to the person first feifedof that honour, was ^ upon motion, ordered to He deferred till Thursday, the 2 ift instanu

; Much

A. 1781. ‘ D E B A T; E ' S.

Much public business in - course, but no debate. —Their Lordships adjourned to Monday,

. June 1 %.

The order of the day for the ' second reading bf the file of Man Bill, being moved for, the Lord Chancellor observed, that in order to expedite the business before the counsel were called in, it would be necessary that their Lordships fhoultl know whether the objections meant to be urged against the principleof. it, or only against particular clauses; because, if "not against the principle, the bill might be read a second time, and immediately committed; whereas, if against the principle, the proper stage to oppofe it would be in the order of the day for reading it a second. time.

The counsel. against the bill were then called in, and having declared it was against the clauses, not the principle, they meant to object, the bill was then read a second time; and immediately after the House resolved itfelf into ’ a committee thereon.

Mr. Bearcroft, as counsel against the bill, entered into a very learned argument, stating his objection against the federal clauses.

To prove some of the material fafts on which his arguments were founded, he called several witnesses; among others, a Mr. Lutwyche, the collector appointed by the Crown in 1765. The purport of his evidence was, to shew that the presentbill would infringe upon several of the rights and privileges vefte ^ l in the Crown, by the aft which paired ' in 1765, for giving the late Duke of Athol and his Duchefs a compensation for the sovereignty of that ifland.

He was interrogated by several noble Lords, - particularly the Lord Chancellor, Lords Mansfield and Temple, and the Duke of Athol.

At length the House was resumed. The Chairman ordered to report the progrefs, and the committee adjourned to Friday next.

June 19.

As soon as the private business was over, the Duke of Richmond rofe, and after explaining the material parts of the petition which he held in his hand, begged permission to present a petition from the American prisoners, in Mill - House prison, complaining of their being deprived of a proper allowance of bread, clothing, &c.

The

J ' : '

, 35o PARLIA, MEN : T, AR ' - ? Aii ) 8i.

The petition was ’ accordingly received, and being read at the table, purported that the petitioners were allowed only » one pound of bread a day, while the French, Spanish, and Dutch were allowed a poupd and a half, within the fame period; and concluded with praying fol a larger allowance of bread, and for a more regular supply of clothes and other necessaries. v

The usual forms being thus complied with, his Graces said, he wished to call their Lordships attention to this bu - finefs; for though not a subject of the first consequence, it was one in which their Lordship’s humanity was deeply interallied; he would add more, the principle of humanity might be still farther extended. The men who had fought our battles by land and sea, might feel in turn all those ills the petitioners complained of, and though retaliation upon individuals, who could be supposed to have no hand in those a, £ls of severity and opprelfion, was infinitely cruel and unjuft; yet so it happened, that the poor prisoner was often made to experience in his own person those ills which was infii&ed upon him, on account, of the prefumed oppression ’ or misconduct of government.

His Grace, after this short prefatory discourse, moved,

- that the petition do lie on the table. This being agreed to, his Grace moved, that said petition be referred to a committee of the whole House, on Monday fe ’ nnight ., ‘

He could not fit down, he said, without making one ob - servation. He thought it necessary that some of the fefvants of the Crown should rife, and state to the House whether the principal fast stated in the petition, hamely, that the Americans received but one pound of bread a day, while the French, Spanish, and Dutch prisoners received a pound and an half, was or. was not true ? because if the fa& was denied, it would be necessary to move, that the cammissioners of hurt and sick leamen do attend to give evidence. On the other hand, if the fast was admitted, the committee might proceed immediately, on the day appointed, to take the contents of the petition into consideration.

Earl of The Earl of Sandwich said, he entered the House wholly SarJ % eich. unprepared to speak with any confi4ence on the fqbjeft, but, he allured the noble Duke, he made no doubt but he should be able to give him. and the House every satisfaction they wanted.

All he was, at present prepared to say, was, that the American prisoners stood upon a very different footing with those

of

A; 1781. DEBATES. fit

of France Spain, and Holland; the latter being deemed priforters of war, according to the established law of nation ^; the former being deemed criipirials, found in arms against their la. wful fpvereigd ;

His Lordship concluded, With expressing an earnest desire; that the matter should be brought before the House, and fairly and fully difeuffed; and as the noble Duke had, intimated a wish of intention of moving for the attendance of the commissibriers Of Sick arid Hurt in order to be examined as to the truth of the allegations set forth in the petition; he hoped the noble Duke would follow what he had already done by moving for their attendance.

The Duke of Richmond said, he was well pleased to find, Duke of that the noble Earl was so willing to forward the enquiry, Richmond and he should chearfully adopt his Lordship’s recommendation, in moving for the attendance of the commissioners of lick and hurti

As to some of the Observations which had fallen from the noble Earl, now was not the tirne to enter into the discussion of the merits how far - the Americans were entitled to be treated on the foot of prisoners of wan The committee was the proper place, and as such he should reserve whatever he had to jay on the subject till the question came before their Lordships accompanied with all the circumstances and faCts necessary to enable the House to come to a satisfaCtory and equitable decision ;

His Grace moved for the attendance of the commissioners; agreeably to the wish expressed by the noble Earl 5 which being agreed to, the House adjourned ;

June 2G.

Private business being finished, the order of the day for the House to resolve itfelf into a committee on the Almanac - duty bill, Lord Sands was called to the chair :

His Lordship read several of the clauses, which were agreed to, till he came to that by which any person who shall vend ot1 expose to sale an almanac Without a {tamp, or on. which the {tamp or impression shall be plainly made if convicted, shall be liable to a penalty of ten pounds.

The Lord Chancellor wished, that tHofe intruded with thQZsrd Char, drawing up of bills. Were either more careful or better in - ee ^ ’ sr ftruCted. The clause {truck him as ’ direCtly contradictory; for while it negleCted, according as the clause was worded, to enable the prbfecutor to recover the penalty, where there was Vol, h T t. no

3 *

Earl i ? d - iburj}.

LorJ < ? / ' £ », ? rs. ’. tr *

Karl B, r - iiir ' Jt.

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

JIG Ramp, it punished the vender for complying with the very principle of the bill, that of railing a certain sum of money by a stamp duty *

Earl Bathurst rofe to explain. Pic said various frauds had been pra&ilcd, with regard to the printing and felling of almanacs; among others, it had been a practice so to contrive to print a sheet almanac that it could be cut into pieces and made up in the form of a book; another was, printing them upon blank paper, and cutting out the Ramps of an old al - tnanac, and affixing them thereto The present clause to ] defeat both lpccies of fraud, ordained that the almanacs should be so printed, as that part of the printing should appear on the stamp, which would in his apprehension effectu - ally prevent the annexing an old stamp to a new almanac.

The Lord Chancellor disapproved of the explanation, as containing no satisfactory answer to his objection; at leaft, he was so dull of apprehension, as not to comprehend it. What {truck him was, that foine word had crept into the clause, which the penner of it never designed It was fair to prefume, that he intended to state it in this manner, that where there is no stamp, or where there was not a plain stamp, that the vender or owner was liable to pay a penalty of ten pounds. He imagined therefore, that the word wt, was by accident omitted. It appeared to him a grofs mil - take, and as such he recommended to their Lordships not to give their sanction to what at prclent seemed to him to be I nonfenfe.

Earl Bathwjl said, he had attended carefully to the noble and learned Lord’s objection. The clause, if altered, would enable the fraudulent as heretofore to uie the old instead of new stamps, such would be the consequence of his Lordship’s amendment, for by introducing the word not, the venders of almanacs would be at liberty to have recourle to their long pra&ifed frauds with impunity.

The clause was agreed to without farther opposition; and witnesses called to the bar and examined, to prove the alle - j gations Rated in the preamble.

The witnesses were Doctor Dennis, vice chancellor of the university of Oxford; and Mr. Borlafe, register of the unl - verfity of Cambridge; and a Mr. Young *

' The substance of the evidence was, that by a charter of Charles I. the uniyerfity of Oxford were authorised to print all manner of book *, almanacs, prognoftications, &c. that

the

A. 1781. DEBATES,

the university had leased this right to Meffrs. Wright and ' Gill in the year 1; 65, at a rent or sum of five hundred and fifty pounds per annum, upon a prefumption that the printing of such books was veiled in the university exclusively. The original leflees re - leased the fame to the Stationer’s company in 1 67, when it appeared that the company rendered Meffrs. Wright and Gill the above sum for a part, namely the liberty of printing almanacs, pfalters. A, B, C ’ s, & : c.

The original charter granted to the university of Cambridge was next produced, granted by Henry Yllf, in the 20th year of his reign; proving, that an equal right had been veiled by that charter in that university.

Several questions were then put to Mr. Dennis from with n the bar, particularly by Earl Bathurll and Lord Walfingham; the fubllance of his answers was to the following effect.

That the university had continued to receive from Melfrs. Wright and Gill the sum specified in the agreement till after a decree of the court of Chancery in 1776; that the money was partly applied to the keeping the Ichool and public buildings in repair, and partly expended in the printing of learned works. He mentioned several that had been printed, or were now at prefs; which, from their nature, had, or were likely to have a very limited sale. Dr. Kennicott had, to encourage him to prosecute his learned and uleful researches, an allowance of fifty pounds a year out of this fund; but that lince the decree made by the court of Chancery, in the case of Carnan, the Stationer’s company having difeoritinued their payments, Mr. Alderman Wright had agreed to pay for such part of the monopoly as remained the annual sum of two hundred guineas.

Mr. Borlafe upon being examined, by several noble Lords, said, the five hundred a year received from the Stationer’s Company, was mixed in the general fund of the university; that it had discontinued the printing of learned books, and confined their prefs foiely to the printing of such works as were likely to produce a profit. He Hated several other circumstances of lefs consequence; and concluded with laying, that the annual estate of the university was ahour fourteen hundred pounds; that it possessed ten thousand pounds in the funds, but that the interest received thereon coniti - tuted a part of the annual income already mentioned.

As soon as the witnesses withdrew, the Lord Chancellor said, the allegations contained in the preamble remained yet to be

T t 2 proved.

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781,

proVed, not a fyliable in either of the charters read at the bar giving the leaft colour to the veiling an exclusive right in the universities to print almanacs, which was the very essence of the bill, and the only l ’ olid ground on which it could firmly ( land or fall.

His Lordship begged to know what were the words in those charters which conveyed the monopoly. With all his induflry, and he had been peculiarly attentive while the charters were reading, the only phrafe or sentence which ma - : e any impression on his mind was, omnes libros omnimdo hnprejjh; that right the university of Oxford had granted to Mr. Wright for the valuable consideration of two hun - r died guineas a year. He iubmitted therefore to their Lord - ships, whether it would be fitting their wil ' dom and dignity, he might add their justice, toflate that, in the preamble of a bill, to be law which was known not to be so, nor had ever been considered as such. If the fails and question of law liad been truly and fairly Hated, their Lordships would in that case be at liberty to act agreeably to their own judge : ment, they might think proper, as was the case almost every day, to make that law which was not so before; but as long as he had the honour of a feat in that House, he should ever set his face against any legislative ail, however necessary or well intended, which carried on the face of it fails miftated, or false suggestions, as the grounds of their Lord - ships assent. This, indeed, if countenanced or prailifed, would be a mofl dangerous innovation, because it would in its consequences go to the corrupting the great fountain of ligiflation itfelf, and in the end be produitiye of every Ipe - cies of evil.

So far as to the justice of the bill, as to the intended application of the money proposed to be raised by it; he con - sessed himself totally - ignorant what motive or pretext there could be for wantonly lavishing so considerable a part of a public tax upon the two universities. Was it consistent with the wifdom and prudence of that House, at a moment like the prefect, when the country was preifed to the very bone by accumulating debts and taxes; when every polfible means should be resorted to, to reduce the public expenditure within the narrowefl circle of the most rigid cseconomy, confident with the safety, honour, and well being of the state. Was it io any point of view justifiable to bestow so large a sum, or - rather throw it away upon so trifling an object

n. 1781. DEBATES. '

Had there been any proofs adduced to shew that the uni verfities would thrive better with the five hundred pounds, it might furnish one argument in favour of the bill; but he would so far do them justice as to acknowledge, that nothing like it had been pretended. It was acknowledged by one witness, that the money received by the univeifity of Oxford had been spent in public feasts, till a regulation had taken place to prevent it; and at Cambridge. it had been all along thrown into the common flock of the univeifity; nor was either stipend, in his apprehension, employed to any of the uses for which they had been originally granted.

Taking the matter in the mod favourable point of view, was it of material benefit that the univeifity of Oxford employed their money in printing books, which, when printed, nobody would buy, as had been very ingenuoufly dated by the reverend gentleman when examined at the bar; and for what reason ? the very bed in the world, because when primed it was one man in a thousand, nay in an hundred thousand, po. uld either read or comprehend them.

For his part, when he went to university, he endeavoured to acquire that species of learning whiqh promifed to be - most useful to him in his intended pursuits of life, otherwise he iliould think that he had spent his. time very unprofitably. He never troubled himself about Persian or Coptic, but confined his attention to that kind of dudy, which was likely to make him underdood, and toenable him to understand in turn.

Much ft refs had been laid on an edition of Lord Clarendon’s State Letters; yet, whatever merit the university of Oxford wiflied to derive from this circumdance, it was at mod but partial. There were many wife and able men of all parties, who thought it would have been full as well if the idea had never been fuggeded or adopted, —who were of opinion, ., that the private letters of datefmen might have better lain in their original depositaries, thar ^ after so many years be dragged into public view.

His Lordship adverted to other books mentioned at the bar, which he called curious trifles; and observed, that at Cambridge, they had long since wholly forbourne to print any books but such as held out a profpe£t of a profitable sale. His Lordship observsd, that conferring favours on the universities, was attended with a certain degree of popularity very pleating to some men. It invited to panegyric and eulogy. Ic was easy to make a fine speech ia their praife; and to ring the changes, ad infinitum,

upon

$zS PARLIAMENTARY A. 17B3 *

upon the propriety of doing every thing which could promote their interest, as the great fcminaries of morality, I religion, and learning. This all founded very well in a j speech; but however great the deserts of the universities j might be, it was one thing to reward them ^ and another to ! sacrifice law, truth, justice, and prudence to effect that, which, if necessary, could be effected without any sacrifice j whatever. j

He believed no noble Lord who heard him, entertained an higher veneration and respect for those two learned semi - ] naries than he did. Exteniive as they were in their learning, j and exemplary in their morals, he considered them as every 1 way entitled to public esteem; he thought them productive j of the highest national benefit, and a public ornament to t the kingdom; but deep as these ideas had imprinted them - j selves in his mind, he could never consent to the passing of ] a bill, the ground of which was founded in falshood. The j claim or right stated in the preamble, being equally repugnant to law and justice. The law had already declared it - ! self again ft. the claim; it was unsupported by custom, and was of courle, in whatever shape it might be brought for - ward, founded upon false premiles. So far he thought he had discharged his duty; if however a majority of their 1 Lerdships should differ with him in opinion, he should in j that event acquiesce, being resolved to give their Lordships no farther trouble.

Arrh ^ c of The Archbishop of Canterbury said, for his part he totally Ga ter bury. ( {j r ecj from the learned and noble Lord who spoke last.

He could not fee the bill in the fame light in which the noble Lord had described it.

As to the money proposed to be granted to the two universities, and which had been formerly paid by the Stationer’s company, it had been paid for a leafe of that right, which by the charters granted to the universities, it was prefumed j had veiled such a right in them. This right had not been questioned for a period of upwards of 150 years, and it was isniverfally understood, that the princes who granted those charters, were fully competent so to do; not as an aft of mere prerogative, unlupported by law, ' but as supreme head of the church.

The Calendar, annexed to the book of Common - prayer, formed part of the ritual; and therefore, in his opinion,. came very properly under the cognisance of the church, and of the king its supreme head.

1

In

32y

h tfiu debates.

In former times, the Archbishop of Canterbury, or his chaplain, revifed or examined every almanac before publication, and even {till the fame custom was adhered to in respect of the Calendar, His Grace concluded a specch of considerable length, with declaring his full approbation of the present bill, as supported by ancient indilputed claims, and strictly conformable to the rules of equity and justice.

Lord Walfingham opened his speech with acknowledge - Lord mentsof the great abilities of the noble and learned Lord who spoke lately, [ the Lord Chancellor ] and professing his great respect and prompt attention to whatever fell from that noble Lord. That it would ill - become him to attempt to follow that learned Lord upon this question as a point of law. That he could not conceive the merits of the decilion of the court of Common Pleas need now be the subject of their Lordships difeuffion. Yet, if ever that question should again be agitated in any other ( hape, the decision he was sure would stand the teft of the severest scrutiny; and though his own partial opinion might lead him from particular reasons to treat it with un - usual deference and respect, yet he was authorized as a public man to speak of it as perfeft, because unanimous and hitherto uncontradifted; binding because no man had ventured to appeal from it. The fast however was, that whether the decilion was right or wrong, the universities had from that moment been deprived of a revenue of 500I. per annum each, which they had long been in the receipt of, in consequence of their having made over to the Stationer’s company their right, whether real or supposed, of printing almanacs, until it was found that such a right was not exclusive. The bill was offered, under these circumstances ^ to their Lordships consideration in two lights : First, to raifean additional sum. of money by way of duty upon almanacs; lecondly, to appropriate 1000I, per annum of that sum, as an indemniftcaion to the two universities for the loss they have sustained.

But the noble Lord at the head of his Majesty’s council had urged another very material reason, distinct from the profeffed object of the bill, to induce their Lordships to concur in passing it into a law, and that was respecting the revenue, which the noble Lord proved to have been groi ' slv injured, and that in a two - fold manner, both by fraud and evasion. The aft requires a {ingle duty for almanacs printed on one ftde of the paper, and a double one for all others. This they evade, by printing a sheet almanac

328 ' PARLIAMENTARY Ai 17811

fb that it could be folded up and bound up in a book, and be fold as a book almanac, which ought to pay double duty; and secondly,. by cutting off old stamps and affixing them to new almanacs; to prevent which, it is flow proposed to print the almanac over, the stampi They answered in effect, it was true the fame end though the mods differed according as opportunity or expediency invited.

He did not take this merely for granted, though he I heard it urged in argument, but formed his opinion upon ] the moil incontrovertible evidence the acknowledgment of I of one of the offending parties; for Mr. Carnan had himself I admitted the sass, and stated by way of apology, that it I had been the custora of the trade, and he had done no more 1 than the rest of his brethren. He told their Lordships 1 > plainly, in an instrument containing his case, that he had 1 been obliged to do so; consequently there could be no 1 further doubt respecting that species of evasion which, in I his opinion, fully supported the preamble of the bill which was a material part of the noble and learned Lord’s objession § His Lordship hoped, after such proofs as these, the 1 House would entertain no farther doubts, respecting the material injury the revenue muff continue to suffer should. the present bill be thrown out; and if any additional motive were necessary to quicken their Lordships attention, he trusted the very pointed and just observations made by the noble Lord who spoke last, would be suficient to satisfy their Lordships, that the present bill, independent of the profeft obje£t which it held out, seemed in the present fttuation of public affairs to challenge double attention.

The noble Lord had remarked with his usual ability, and pressed with his wonted weight and force of argument, the necefSty of a ftri£t collession of the national revenue, and of its faithful application and expenditure in the public service. It followed then, that if the present bill went to corre£t or detect an existing evil; namely, evasion of payment or actual fraud, that it of course embraced one of the prime objects, which the noble and learned Lord appeared to have so much at heart.

On this ground the bill appeared most clearly to meet. the sentiments of the noble Lord, and of course must so far strike his Lordship, as wife, necessary, and expedient. He begged however to make one observation upon an argument which had fallen from the noble Lord, and which must strike home to the feelings of every serious and of every

hone®

A. V781. D E BAT E S.

Jioneft mind, viz. the care that should be taken how new taxes were imposed upon the subject which might be an additional grievance to them under their present difficulties : This was a tax. Which if not raise ' d by the bill, was not to be paid at all; it was an optional tax, not a tax of compulv fion; for every man might buy an almanac, or not, as he pleased : it was a tax upon curiosity perhaps, or upon luxury, for it could hardly be called a necessary of life; it could be but two - pence in a year upon each individual ;, and piofl : of all, it would fall upon the fraudulent, and not upon the honest part of the community.

The utility of the bill in his apprehension being thus proved, he hoped, to the full satisfaction of every noble Lord who heard him, the application of the sum, propofecl to be raised, was in his opinion no lefs commendable; as ? lfo what advantages the public would be deprived of, if this bill did not pass into a law. He expatiated on the many useful and valuable books which never would have fcen the light if it had not been for the encouragement they received from this fund; works of a curious and literary defqription, but perhaps not in great demand from the public at large, and which therefore it would not have answered to any person of the trade to have printed for public sale. He dwelt on the excellence of their editions, of the classics, and referred the House to the preface of Dr. Harwood’s Claflics a book of good repute, in which the university publications are described at large.

His Lordship took an occasion, in the courle of this eulo - gium on the two universities, to allude to his own education there, but more particularly to his father’s having repre - fented the university of Cambridge; yet how much soever he might be attached, as if he a£ted on a public nieafure from his private feelings, he did allure the House he never wilhed to substitute partiality or prejudice fkr ’ motives which could only operate with him as a legif&tof, He was bound, as a member of that House, to ftifie drrsuspend his feelings, and only to consult hrs judgement, abstracted from every other consideration; to take up thd Measure fairly, and consider. it only upon public ground, ’

In - that point of view he was perfuaded, that the bill now before the House would appear to be strictly and fully - entitled to their Lordships countenance; as the benefits intended to be confined on the universities, were not partial or personal benefits to them exclusively, but directed ex -

Vo : l, 1. U u prelsly

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781,

pressly to the advancement of Science, and the dissemination of learning. His Lordffrip then drew a comparison between the protection given to other universities in alt the polished courts of Europe, and called upon the House to enable our own universities to maintain the high rank they at present enjoyed over the whole globe, as repertories of knowledge and science, in all their respective branches. He said, it had ever been the practice of all civilized countries in all times to encourage these institutions, for the obvious benefits which were the natural result of them. It had been so from the days of the learned and eloquent statesman, who established the first ' library at Athens, down to the times in which we live, and where that laudable emulation is still to be observed in those modern ornaments of Europe, the Err ^ peror’s library, the Louvre, and the Vatican.

Surely then with us it is peculiarly an object of legiflativq consideration ' : it has always been considered so; and it is upon this principle that the act of queen Anne directs, that copies of all books, entered at Stationers Hall, should be - de - i livered to those two universities. And in the year 1736 he mentioned an instance of an account being laid before the House of Commons, of the aCtual number which had been then delivered, and which number he Hated to the House, He also mentioned other instances, ' in which Parliament had taken up the cause of the universities on public ground.

He knew it would be very unnecessary to quote the example of the other House, or endeavour to rouze in their breasts a commendable emulation in respect of the encouragement to be given to learned men and learned works, : He was perfuaded, that their Lordships would not be be - hind hand with the other House, but would gladly Hand forth the protestors, encouragers, and patrons of science, whenever patronage and protection became necessary, And here he begged leave to pbferve, with all poflibie deference to the noble Lord who spoke last, who he hoped would ex - cule him for differing from him respecting the works printed at the Clarendon prefs, which the learned Lord represented as totally ufeiefs, and not calculated to answer the real and substantial purposes of learning. He believed that might be the case in some ipstances, but by no means ip all, or even in a comparative degree. But, allowing that the objection was better founded than it appeared to him to be, he would submit to the learned Lord, whether what might seem not to be calculated tq Convey general instruction,

1 vyoyld

33 *

A; 1781; DEBATES ;

would not reflect honour on the university for their attention > even to the raoft abstruse works, if they could be useful to any particular or local branch of literature and by having made their way to the several great feats of learning, irt Europe remain as monuments of the disinterestedness and public spirit of a British university; /

His Lordship urged several other able and afipofite arguments in favour of the bill, which on account of the continual disorder and talking below the bar, we could not properly cotleft. And after passing some farther compliments on the Lord Chancellor, said, the bill was, upon, every ground of justice and utility entitled to his most hearty concurrence.

The Lord Chancellor said he thought it hecefiary before the The L » d committee role to explain a few particulars which leemed to Char - cel : aTi be mifunderstood by the noble Lord Who Ipoke Iaft.

His Lordship, before he went into explanation paid several handfome compliments to the noble Lord’s candour and abilities. He was a credit to that House, and an ornament tb his public, character, and - as lo accomplished a Ipeaker was lilteded to with that degree of attention which distinguilhec ! talents were ever sure to command, it became the more ne - celfary for him to prevent the effects of misapprehension in the Ipeaker.

It was merely on this ground that he rofe again, after having been up so often in the course of the afternoon, and he milled their Lordships would accept of this as a proper apology for the trouble he was going to give them ;

The noble Lord had thrown out an idea relative to the le ^ gal decision between the Satiorier’s company and their opponent, as if he had called the justice of that decision in the court of Common - pleas in question. Had he done lo he should have laid himself juftly open to the moll severe ani - madverfion, because that decision made no part of the present case, and if it had would in the mariner represented by the noble Lord, have weakened, instead of strenghened his argument. The question, if he understood it right, was not directly concerning the charters granted to the two universities; but to the validity of the patent which they had granted to the Stationers company ;

His Lordship made two or three oblervations to the lame purport, and fat down with declaring his total disapprobation of the bill *

Uni The

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781. -

The clauses being all agreed to, the bill was immediately reported ;, and ordered to be read a third time.

The House adjourned at eight o ’ clock to the next day.

' June 21.

Their Lordships this day resumed,. according to order, the committee of privileges and elections on the claim of Colonel Francis Twifleton, to the barony of Say and Sele.

The proofs were complex and various, and were rather circumfiantial and collateral, than specific and direct. The claimant had a very full bar; his counfei were, the Attorney General, and Meflrs. Macdonald, Lee, and Kenyon.

It was first Hated, that by letters patent, the 21ft of James I. the anccHor of the claimant, Col. Twiftleton, of the name of Fiennes, was created baron Say and Sele, to him and his heirs, which of course rendered the honours descendible to the heirs - general, id failure of male issue; that this Lord had issue four fons, none of whom had issue but the ' second ' Ion, who had a daughter, who was married to a Mr. Twifle - ton. There was only a part of this Ton’s will read, to prove this marriage; which, among other things recited, that his daughter had inter - married with the claimant’s ancestor without his consent, and contrary to his approbation. The iiext proof was, a petition in 1709, presented to the House of Peers, we believe, when the honours were claimed by the son of this marriage, and his claim was allowed, as appeared by an. entry on the Journal.

The case farther Hated, that this claimant had four fons,. all of whom died without issue male, but the claimant’s ancestor; that the eldest son left issue one daughter, who was Lady Langham, and that ( he died, in the year 1715, without issue.

To prove the honours to be vested in the defeendarits of the second son, there was little more produced than the copies of two monumental inlcriptions,

These Hated, that the second son of, the HvH Lord Say, of the Twifletpn family, married in Ireland; that he had served abroad in the wars of king William and queen Anne, &c. and tetired with the rank of colonel from the service in the year 1715; all which was inserted on his. monument in the - church of Boughton, in Oxfordshire; which in - fc. fiption was. authenticated upon view, by. the present re&or of the parifli. Two other monumental inferiptions were : Hated, one. of them in Kent, the other in Bunhill - flelds burial -

‘ ground,

A. 1781. DEBATES. 333

ground, referring to the relationship, of the respective per - ions deceased, to the family of Say and Sele, which then poffcfTed the title. One of the inscriptions was proved to cxift; the other, upon search, was not to be found, or was so defaced as not to be intelligible, though there was an affidavit, signed by a noted, and respestable solicitor, of fered in evidence, that he had seen and read said infeription in Bunhill fields, in the year 1732, when the claimant’s father sued for the present honour.

A copy of a certificate, of the marriage of Col. Fiennes Twifleton, the grandfather of the present claimant, with a Mifs Clark, in the castle of Dublin, was offered, but it would not be received as evidence, as the original ought to have been produced, or the copy authenticated, at the bar.

Mr. Thomas Twifleton ’ s. will, son of Colonel Fiennes Twifleton, and father of the claimant, was read, to shew that he was the son of the former and father of the latter.

It was likewise proved, that Lady Langham, the last heir of the first baron Say and Sele, made a will, and appointed therein the claiment’s father ( Thomas ) her foie heir and executor, stiling him her near relation.

After all those proofs, if they could be deemed so, though they carried along with them marks of internal con vision, the mofl difficult part of the whole case came under c ' on - sideratiom.

It was stated, that the claimant. was the lawful son of Mr. Thomas Twifleton, of Boughton, and of course the grandson of Colonel Fiennes Twifleton.

To prove this, a Mrs. Delafield, the claimant’s aunt, was called as a witness. She said, ( he and her filler, the late Mrs. Twifleton, the claimant’s mother, lived in the family of Twifleton, the father; that file had underflood, though she was not old enough to remember, that Lady Langham was a hear relation to the Twifleton family; that she, about the year 1726 or 1727, ' went - with one of the family as a servant or companion to Yorkshire, where she remained nine or ten years; that, on her return to Oxfordshire, her filler told her in secret, that she Was privately married to Mr. Twifleton; that she had then ( 1736 ) two fons born, the eldest since dead, about two years old, and the present claimant then a child in arms; that five shewed her certifi ' cate of the marriage between her and Mr. Twifleton, dated in 1732 5 that in the next year another son; was born, the, present ' colonel Thomas Twifleton. who is stili living; and ’

1

334

The Lord Ctjunctllor.

PARLIAMENTARY A 178 1

that after the marriage had been for several. years; fconcealed ^ about eight or ten, Mr. Twifleton publicly acknowledged it, and her lifter was as publicly vifited by ' people of fortune and rank, and, among others, the present Earl of Guildford; that the boys were called matter Tom and Frank, &c. without the addition of any surname, till after ' the marriage was publicly declared; that they were sent to school to Banbury and Bloxham, and treated in every relpett as gentleman’s children.

A gentleman was examined as to the boys being sent to school; said he had been at the fame school with them fc early as the year 1740; that they were called Tommy, &c. till the marriage was publicly declared, which was not till the year 1744, when Mrs. Twifleton was vifited by all the neighbouring nobility and gentry. /

The Earl of Guildford consented to be examined relpecting the intimacy between his family and Mrs. Twifleton, and confirmed every thing respecting it which had been deposed at the bar. •

The claimant’s father’s will was then read, in which was contained an account of his several fons by name, and describing the eldest of them to be a lieutenant in the first regiment of guards, and the other in the third, of which Lord Rothes was then colonel,, and reciting his provision for his wife of three hundred pounds per annum, to whom he had been married about twenty - six years before. This will was made in 1758.

Sir Robert Eden was called to prove, that he was present on the 10th of September, we believe in the fame year, in

Germany, when the said elder brother, lieutenant - — -

Twifleton, of such a regiment of guards, was wounded, of I which wound he immediately died. j

The certificate of the marriage was likewise proved, signed j by one of the curates of the parifli of Cripplegate, dated 1732; and it had been deposed both by Mrs. Delafield and another witness, that the claimant was born in, or immediately about, the year 1735.

The evidence being closed, the t Lord ' Chancellor rofe and observed, that the evidence adduced in proof of the pedigree, if it could be called one, though loofe, inaccurate, and wanting actual certainty or specification, nevertheless carried with it such an air of truth and authenticity,. as should induce him to forbear any animadversion; so many well - ' devised fidtions mutt have been created that it jvould do a.

1 violence

A. 1781. D E B AXES. 33$

violence to common sense and common probability, to prefume that they were forged j and he was disposed to pass over this part of the case the more, as the only doubt he understood which lay upon their Lordships minds was relpe£fc - ing the legitimacy; It was necessary befiu ' es, before he proceeded farther, to take notice, that the late Mr. Thomas Twifleton, the claimant’s father, presented a petition to the King in the year 1733, which was referred to the then Attorney - General, Willes, afterwards Chief - justice of the Common - pleas, upon which Mr. Attorney made his report, which was directly in favour of the claimant, and afterwards his Majesty referred said petition and report to that House, who proceeded on it till the Parliament was diffoived. The affair having thus dropped, the claimant, for family reasons respecting the noble Lord, who held the vifeounty of Say and JSele, declined all farther proceedings.

As to the point of legitimacy, there was indeed some ground for doubt, but not sufficient in his apprehension to bar the claimant’s title : there was a certificate of the marriage; there was the education of the children, and the pro - vision made for the mother and her offspring; all confirming and corroborating the a ' ctual existence of a marriage between Mr. Thomas Twilleton, the father, and Mrs. Gardner.

There, was moreover an indorsement on the hack of the certificate, in the father’s hand - writing, authenticating in the moll solemn manner the marriage; add to this circum - stance, that there were motives which induced the falher to conceal his marriage for a while; but as soon as that impe - - diment ( the lame as prevented him from urging his claim to the peerage ) was removed, he publicly acknowledged Mrs.

Gardner for his wife, and Ihe was vifited in consequence of that acknowledgment by all the female, as well as male, people of fashion in her neighbourhood.

For these several reasons he should move, that the claimant being the heir - general of the baron Say and Sele, created by letters patent to him and his heirs, gift of James I.

| is entitled to said honours.

I The committee was then diffoived, and the Chairman ordered to report said refoiution immediately to the House.

[ Their Lorclships then went to prayers, and the House ) eing resumed. Lord Sandy’s reported laid refoiution, which vas unanimoully agreed to, and an order made, that a eport be made to his Majesty of the proceedings, that his Majesty ^ juay be graciously pleased to issue his writ, directed

to

336 PARLIAMENTARY ' A 1781.

to colonel Francis Twifieton, summoning and enjoining his attendance in that House, as baron Say and Sele,

June 22.

As soon as the private business was finished, their Lord - ships resumed the committee of the Jfle of Man bill.

The object of the bill was shortly this; The late Duke of Athol fold the royalty of Man to the Grown, in the year 1765, for the sum of seventy thousand pounds, reserving to himtelf all his proprietory and manorial rights; in short, every thing he would have been entitled to as a subject.

This agreement was sanctioned by an act of Parliament, as well to the providing an equivalent as to secure to the parties, the Crown, the Duke of Athol, and the inhabitants of the Istand, their respective powers, authorities, claims, and privileges,

By the penning of this act of Parliament, the family of Athol deemed themselves injured. The late Duke, fora specific sum, had agreed to part with the sovereignty of Man to the crown of Great - Britain, but they conceived, partly from the terms of the agreement, and partly from the construction put upon them by the King’s officers in that Island, that he had been materially injured as lord of the foil, and as lord of the several manors of which it was composed .; {

The present Duke therefore had recourse to Parliament, A - bill for that purpose was introduced into the other House, where it met with considerable opposition, but it at length made its way to this House.

We thought it necessary to give this Abort sketch of the reasons and motives of the bill, as it afterwards met with powerful opponents in the persons of the Lord Chancellor and Earl Temple.

Several witnesses were ( examined to prove, that many of the ^ righ ts proposed to be veiled in the present Duke of Athol. by the bill, had never been enjoyed by the last Duke, or any of his ancestors; arid a witness being called to the bar to be examined, who had signed the petition against the bill, a question of parliamentary law arose, which occasioned arguments of considerable length within the bar.

£ord Chan - The Lord Chancellor was of opinion, that a petitioner ctlkr -. against a particular clause of a bill was a competent witness ] respecting every other part of it but that particular clause. j ) > tnB9k. US Lord Loughborough contended, that a petitioner being aj party, was incompetent to be examined ( as in every other '. ‘ case )

A. 1781. D E ' B A T ' £ S. 337

case ) in his own cause. As to the distin&ion made by the noble and learned Lord who spoke last, that a petitioner wa ^ s incompetent to be examined as a witness to any other clause than that in which he was interested himself, it might be so managed, without any great ftretcb. of ingenuity, that if there were three or more petitioners, who all wished to be examined, that A. for instance, having petitioned against a particular clause, might be rendeted competent to give evidence respe&irig another clause, and so with B. C. and D. till at length, by this management, the several petitioners might be admitted to give evidence against the whole bill, and thus the distin&ion taken by the noble Lord be as effectually defeated, as if no such rule of evidence had been in existence. He was clear in the first instance, that no witness could be examined in a cause in which, as a petitioner, he had acknowledged himself to be interested; that the d > f - tinftion for admitting a petitioner to be examined against every part of a bill, but what he complained of was in his opinion a distin&ion without a difference; gnd of course he was of opinion, that the evidence now offered at the bar was totally inadmiilable.

The Earl of Mansfield observed, that the noble and learn - Earl Man/ ed Lord who took the lead in the present conversation, - ^ fW had, he prefumed, formed his ideas on the general rules of evidence established in the courts below; whereas in a great variety, of cases there was nothing more different. The courts below adhered to certain rules and forms ( or the better regulating and conducing their proceedings, so had Parliament, and in many iostances they bore not the leaft analogy to each other.

The rule of Parliament as long as he had any knowledge its form of proceeding, had been to refuse the evidence of my witness who had petitioned against the bill, either in the whole or in part. The reason of this rule in his apprehen - - ion, was not as had been suggested by one or two noble Lords, because he was a party, or because he mighj ' have an

Eventual interest in the fate of the bill, but limply,. because he iad signed a petition against it. His Lordship mentioned fe - eral instances, in which this rule of Parliament had been, ridtly adhered to; and concluded with giving it as his clear pinion, that the witness was not competent to be examined efpecting any part of the bill.

The Lord Chancellor replied in a stile rather bordering pon the ambiguous and ironical. He laid, he had be ? n fp ?, ng accustomed to look up to the noble and learned Lord Vol, I. X x who

PARLIAMENT ARY A. 1781.

who was so deservedly placed at the head of his profession, that he always heard with reverence and with no final ! degree of submission, whatever fell from his Lordship; and and whenever he had the misfortune to differ upon any professional point, with the noble Lord, he had a con - ffiant predifposition to suppose that he himself was wrong, and the noble and learned Lord right. He had been long in the habit of paying almost an implicit deference to everything which fell from his Lordship, and to bow to it as the highest authority, having rarely liflened to him upon dif - cuffions of questions of law, in which he did not bring home the fulleft conviction to his mind.

These were his sentiments nakedly given, not with any view or intention of adulating the noble and learned Lord, but merely as a matter of justice.

In what he said now, he merely adverted to the judicial character of the noble and learned Lord in the court of King’s - Bench; but however implicit every opinion of his as Chief - justice of that court was acquiesced in, it was not always so very current in Parliament, nor relied upon with that degree of confidence. It was only therefore as a legiflator that he prefumed to differ from the noble Lord, and he could safely oppofe to what had been asserted by his Lordship, what frequent experience had brought within his own knowledge, while he had fat in Parliament, and acted as counsel the bar of both houses.

His Lordship, after a variety of arguments to prove the competency of the witness offered to be examined, affirmed once more, as long as he knew any thing of Parliament, either as a member or counsel, the uniform custom had been to admit" a witness to give evidence against every other part or clause of a bill but that against which he had petitioned. Upon the question put by the chairman, the witness was rejeCled as incompetent without a division.

Sir George Moore was then examined. His evidence went to prove, that several of the reservations in the bill were not supported by custom or ulage. He said he had been Speaker in the Island upwards of thirty years. The fisheries deemed royal were very different from those deemed mane rial. Within the former description came the duty or1 portion of all herrings caught upon the coasts of the Island, and at sea; and as to the game, he never understood that the kings of Man, as sovereigns or lords of the foil, claimed any other but hawks or hearns. Partridges had got into the

Island

A. 17S1. DEBATE S; 33c

Island so early as the year 1736, and since then, groufe and moor - game, but he never knew that they had been claimed by the Athol family as a right annexed either to the fove - reignty or lordship of the Island.

The counsel then went at large into the case of his clients, and pointed out a great variety of hardffiips they must undergo should the preferit bill pass into a law; contending, that the herring custom appertained to the royalty, and not to the seignory of the Iflarld; and that consequently, while the principle of the bill went to di veil : out of the Crown those rights for which it had given to the late Duke of Athol a very valuable confederation; the people would on the other hand, feel themselves most grievously injured and oppressed by those middle claims, set up in the character of lord of the foil.

Earl Batburjl observed, that thebill in its present form appear - Earl ed to him extremely complicated; that many solid objections had been made at the bar against feveralof the clauses, which in his opinion, should the bill proceed, would require fuller investigation. By saying this, he did not wifli to be understood, as giving an opinion one way or other, only he thought it his duty to propole his intended motion, with his motives for making it, which were, < c that the House be resumed, and that the chairman do report projrrefs. ”

Earl Temple said, he had constantly attended since this bu - ^ atI Tmph finefs came before the House, and had given every attention to it to which it seemed to be entitled. He thus acted, for two teafons; first, under a call of general duty, as a member of that House, but more particularly as a near and dear relation of his [ his father, the late George Grenville ] was the person, who in the character of First Commissioner of the Treasury, was prefumed to have negociated the affair from the beginning to the final conclusion. He could not, he said, abstain from expressing his aflonishment, that none of the law officers of the Crown took any. part in the business.

It was surely their duty to fee that the rights of the Crown were not invaded; and it would be but candid in them to acknowledge, had they thought so, that the agreement made between the Crown and the Duke of Athol, intrenched on the rights of the seignory; though nothing was originally meant to be parted with or purchased, but those deemed royal or sovereign.

He fancied, great attention had been originally paid to this business by the law officers at the time the agreement

X x 2. took

340

PARLIAMENTARY

A, 1781.

Viscount

Stormont.

took effect; and if he was well informed whenever doubts subsequently arose, no lefs diligence had. been resorted to.

The opinions of the Attorney and Solicitor generals, in 1765, and upon various occasions, if he was well informed, since held a very different language from that contained in the present bill. He had moved for some of the moil material of those papers some days since, but they had not been till that very day produced. Where the fault originated he would not pretend to say; but till they were on the table for the perufal of their Lordships, and they had time to examine ' and digest them, he did not fee well how their Lordships could proceed farther. The objeAs of the bill, when viewed in detail, might appear but trifling, but the precedent at leaft struck him as dangerous, because it might lead to; the surrender of other rights of infinitely greater importance, and operate as an encouragement to other individuals, to come to Parliament, to urge claims equally inimical to the prerogative of the Crown and the rights and privileges of the people.

Viscount Stormont prefuming, that the noble Earl had insinuated some degree of censure on the King’s servants in that House, for not having taken proper iteps to enforce their Lordship’s order of Monday, in conformity to the noble Earl’s motion, said, there was no possible blarhe imputable to them. The addre ' s was presented to his Majestyas soon 2s it conveniently could. An order was made out to the proper officer with all suitable expedition, and if the papers had not been produced, there was neither neglect or delay on the part of those whose duty it was to fee that said order was complied with. He did not wish at prefer t to enter into the merits of the bill, when the proper time for delivering his sentiments on the subje£t should ' 1 arrive, he was determined to give his opinion free from prejudice or partiality.

Sari - Jimpk Earl Temple assured the noble Lord he had wholly mifcon - ceived him; he never meant to infinuate the leaft degree of censure on the King’s ministers, much lefs on his Lordship respecting the circumstance adverted to He never imagined that the papers had been kept back, through design or ne - gle < ft, or that ministers entertained a wish either way, than 10 far as justice might be concerned.

It was natural for him to betray an anxiety on the occasion, not from a desire of upholding what was wrongs but an earheft desire to scrutinize to the bottom, how far a deceased relation of his had acted agreeably to the sense of the contracting parties. He protested at the fame time, if upon a fair and full investigation of the grounds and objects of that bargain,

A, 1781. DEBATES. 34,

gain, it {hould be found, that the late Duke of Athol had, through inattention or from any other cause, parted with at that time more than the agreement itfelf fairly and liberally imported, so far was he from wishing to injure or opprefs any man, be his cbara&er of situation what it might, that he {hould be one of the first who would ufe his best endeavours, to re&ify the mistake, ' in order to put both parties into that situation in which they were entitled to stand.

The Lord Chancellor observed, that the bill was a private Lord Chax - one in everything but name. Whether it was such a b\\\cellor ' aj ought to pass, he was not prepared to say; because in truth, after all he had heard on the subject in that House, and at the bar, he was so dull as not to be able to comprehend it.

As yet, besides, their Lord/hips Could not pretend to form an opinion, upon having heard counsel and evidence in behalf only of one of the parties. When he heard the whole of what was to be offered on both fides, he would endeavour to make up his mind, and come to an impartial decision.

He could not avoid however taking notice, that the bill came rather under an unfavourable appearance, by being brought forward at - so late a period of the fefEon, considering its importance, and the great number of persons who were to be affected by it. It was absurd to expect a full or even a middling attendance all this summer in that House. The j members fatigued and wasted by aconstant application to public business several mdiiths, had gone to their country - feats for recreation, or to attend their private concerns. He would not even for a minute, harbour an idea that such a condudson.

. thepart of the friends of the bill, had originated in unfair or impure motives, on a supposition, that a bill might be carried through a thin House, which would never have made its way through a full one. He had much too high an opinion of the honour and integrity of the noble Duke, who fwas principally concerned in the event of the bill, to enter - Itain the most distant suspicion of the kind; but still truth I obliged him to declare, that however clear the exception fmight be in the present case, the bringing in bills at the tail iof a fession, wore in general a very doubtful afpedh There Iwas another bill of very Angular importance as he understood,

Inow making its way to that House ( new marriage bill ) which fif. upon no other account, he was determined to oppofe upon ithevery ground he had been stating; and indeed, so long as ' ghe {hould fit in that House, the bringing in of a bill of importance, just at the eve almost of a prorogation, would al - Iways furnish him with one general argument, against enter - iaining it at all at so unfeasonable a. peripd.

3+2

Lord

Chancellor.

Earl of Radnor *

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781 ;

He begged their Lordships would reco ! lc£I, that this was the 22d day of June, that Parliament would probably be prorogued in a few days; and that under such circumstances, after consulting thcmselves fairly, he beseeched them to determine, whether this was a season propet1 for the dif - cuffion of bills, when, at a moderate computation, it might with ftritt just ice be affirmed, that scarcely one - third of the members of both Houses were in town.

In respect of the observation, made by the noble Earl who spoke last, relative to the law - officers of the crown. If they had not attended, it might have proceeded from very proper or prudential motives; if they were called upon however for an opinion, from his knowledge of the gentlemen alluded to, he made no doubt but their decision would be founded in wifdom and justice.

The farther consideration of the bill was deferred to the 25th instant.

The other order of the day was then read, for the third reading of the bill, ‘c for rendering valid certain articles of agreement between the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Earl of Radnor, touching the enfranchisement of the impro priate re&ory of Folkestone, in the county of Kent, under certain conditions therein mentioned. ”

The Lord Chancellor oppofe ' d the third reading, in a speech of considerable length, in which he endeavoured to prove, that the compensation, proposed to be given by the noble Earl, was not an adequate one; observing likewise how dangerous it was to establish a precedent which might lead to numerous bargains of a similar nature, which would in the end tend to the flripping the church of a considerabb part of her patrimony.

The Earl of Radnor replied; and after Rating a variety ol computations affirmed, he would not have a stuffing mori than five per cent, for his money.

The qu eft ion was at length put, when the Lord Chancdh divided the House. Contents ' 5; not - contents 9.

The bill being thus loft, the House rofe at eight o ’ clock and adjourned till Monday.

June 25.

As soon as the uffial business was finished, the order of tb day was read, for the House to go into a committee on 1 bill, entitled an a & ( C To render Valid certain marriages ex crciled in certain chapels, in which banns had not beei i usuall

343

A. 1781, DEBATES.

vifually published, before or at the time of passing an aft : of, the 26th of George II. for the better preventing clandestine marriages. ”

Lord Sandys having taken his feat at the table, the Earl of Coventry rofe and said, he did not mean to oppoie any p of the bill, bvit as a member of that Quarter Sessions, who, in the case of a pauper, were the occasion, by the decilion they came to; in respect of that pauper, there were some difficulties which refted on his mind, which he anxioully wilhed to have removed.

According to the aft of the late king, no marriage could be valid which should not be solemnized in some church or chapel, where it had been usual to publish the banns of matrimony. There were several chapels at that time where divine service had been performed, and a much greater number erected lince the year 1752, which did not answer the description; indeed it was impossible the latter could, the fame not having then been built.

The clause in the marriage aft, however, admitted of a doubtful conllruftion. When therefore the pauper, whose parents were married in such a chapel, came before the court, it was the opinion of the majority of the bench at "the Quarter Sessions, among whom he had the honour to make one, that the case of the pauper was Angularly severe; upon which, whether right or wrong as to the point of law, the latter of which he prefumed to be the case, the Bench determined, that the issue of this marriage, the pauper wras entitled to a settlement, and they decided accordingly.

From this decilion of the Quarter Sessions the party appealed to the court of King’s - Bench, where the contrary was determined to be law. This decilion spread a general alarm throughout the whole kingdom; as it clearly decided, that all marriages solemnized in chapels, erected lince the year 1752, were illegal, and of course dilfoluble at pleasure; and that the issue of all such marriages would in law be deemed illegetimate.

A noble Lord in the other House, [ Beauchamp ] whose zeal in the cause of humahity never ileeps, stepped forth on the occasion, and produced the bill their Lordships were about to take into consideration. He begged pardon, he thought so much by way of explanation would not be improper; but the difficulty he meant to state was this : that similar cases might come before the fame judicature, in which event the Quarter Sessions would be at a iofs in what manner

to

344

Lord

Chancellor,

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781

to aft. On the one hand, the present bill was framed in, order to legalize such marriages; on the other, the determination of the court of King’s - Bench, for aught he knew, would operate as in the case of the pauper upon all instances, where the matter was already in the course of l ' egal procefs. He was the more solicitous to have the advice of persons, better able to judge than himself, because he had more than once, within a very short period, heard a noble and learned Lord express himself rather unfavourably in respect of courts of Quarter Sessions in general. As a member of a court so constituted, he must take the liberty to seek the noble and learned Lord’s advice, in order at leaft to remove one ground of complaint; and to beg the favour that his Lordship would "strengthen their weaknefs, and lighten their darkness. Under such instruction he should return to the country, and resume as usual the functions of a magistrate with confidence, because, acting upon the opinion of so high an authority in law and jurifprudence, all apprehensions of error or miftakes would be removed.

The Lord Chancellor said, as to the question put to him by the noble Earl, he fancied he had it in Kis power to do away his Lordships doubts. The purposes of the present bill were openly declared in the title to be what they really were, and the remedy proposed was a special one, directed to the evil therein described. In every other respect, the bill left the law of the 26th of the late King just where it found it. The case, as he apprehended, was this : that clergymen, ignorant of the law had married persons contrary to the provisions of said statute, which provided, that all marriages, after such a day, should be folemriized in a church or chapel, where it had been customary or usual to publish the banns of matrimony; clearly then, as he. apprehended, if any case similar to that of the pauper ’ s, mentioned by the noble Earl, was now depending, the present bill, if passed into a law, would immediately operate upon such case, and put a stop to all farther proceedings, unless their Lordships meant to make a particular exception to the contrary.

As to what the noble Earl said, respecting the flight or contempt which he had heard thrown upon cotfrts of Quarter Sessions in that House, it could only bare relation to him, and had arisen probably from something which had dropt from him in debating some question, where that court and its jvirifdiftion came to be considered. He thought he had explained himself sufficiently before, but ke should now take

A, 1781 - D E B A T - E S.

the liberty to repeat, what perhaps was not so perfectly understood or attended to at the time. He did allure the noble Lord, that he had not the moll dillant intention to infinuate, much lefs make a direct charge, against so fefpeftable a body of noblemen and gentlemen, many of them of the first rank and character, as fat to dispense justice as ma - glstrates throughout the kingdom : he ' was perfeftly per - faaded of their worth, honour, probity, and abilities. The only objection made by him, was to the nature and extent I of the jurisdiction, not to the mode of exercising the powers veiled by law in the noble and honourable persons alluded to It was a jurisdiction, he would acknowledge, necessary in many cases; but it was a jurisdiction, which for certain purposes, and when re/orted to upon certain occasions, was totally incompatible with the whole frame of our conllitu - ^ tion, particularly so in ail cases respecting property. Whenever a question of that kind was at issue, it ought, in his opinion, to be determined in some one of his Majesty’s courts of law, and that by the verdict of a jury.

The Chairman then proceeded to read the several enacting clauses, but was interrupted by the Lord Chancellor when he read that for indemnifying all clergyman who had offended against the aft of the late King, previous to the present bill taking effect. The clause objected to was, te And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all parfons, vicars, ministers, and curates, who have solemnized, or shall lblemnize, any of the marriages which are hereby enacted to be valid in law, shall be and - are hereby indemnified against. the penalties inflifted by the said recited aft, upon persons who shall solemnize marriages in any other place than a church or chapel, in which banns had been usually published, before or at the time" of passing said recited - aft. ” His Lordship observed, that this clause was manifeftly beside, or different from, the avowed purpose of the bill, which was merely to legalize marriages, which by a late determination of the Court of King’s - Bench were deemed invalid. He should therefore oppofe it on that ground, if he had no other objection; but he had stili a much more solid reafpn for giving it a most marked and direct opposition.

He was ready to allow, that agreeable to the present principle of the bill, that of giving relief in all cases, where chapels had been erected lince the pailing of the aft, the clergyman flood forth in the character of an innocent man.

I. Y y Whenever

346

PARLIAMENT ARY. ^. 1781.

Whenever that should appear to be the case, he inade no dbubt but he would meet every poflible indulgence from the Crown, which ' in his apprehension was the only proper place tp apply; but as he ever had, so lie ever would upon every occasion that might present itfelf, endeavour, as far as he ' was able, to mark out and keep ' separate the powers and rights 6f the legislative and ' executive branches - of the Slate, It Was com pete rit for Parliament to ena£l laws, to describe the ' crime, and annex the punishment. It Was a‘ prerogative of the Crown to mitigate and soften the rigour and severity of the lavy > where the person offending had ’ tfanfgreffed through ignorance ^ or inadvertency, not defigh. To apply the truth of those principles to the case before ’ their Lordships, it was only necessary to observe, that as the ' Crown had the power, so he was sure it would have the will, to interpose arid administer relief, whenever relief was fought, and the person apply ing should make it sappear that fie Had riot wilfully offended. On the other hand, if the present bill should pass into a law the innocent would be confounded with the guilty; the real, premeditated felon, with the person who imagined - when he was acting illegally, or rather criminally, that he was tfien discharging a very proper duty in the way of his profession.

On the whole, the trouble would be but trifling; the innocent man would have nothing to fear, and the guilty man would still refhain under the terror of depending punish - tnent, should he be either detected, or, - upon application to the Crown, be not able to shew that his offence ' had Originated in ignorance.. ' "

Lord Coventry wifhec ! to amend the clause provisiopally, ovtAtry. fame had arose from ignorance or inadvertency *

arid urged some arguments iri support of the amendment, t - ord The Lord Chancellor said, that he would never conlent,

Chancellor. tha ' t the Parliament should intrench upon the known rights and coriftitutional exercise of the executive power. He prefumed there was riot a noble Lord who heard him, that would Hand up an advocate for felony, not accidental, or incidental; but felony founded in guilt, an intention ^ tfarifgreflion agairifl the laws of his country. If not, then there was no occasion for the clause mended or unamended; for the innocent, on a proper application and fa£ls ffated, might oe sure that the Crown would mitigate the severity of the law in respeQ; of them.

Lord

D E B A IT £ S. 347

Lord Dudley argued very ftrenuoiiilyin Support of the Wi Dudley clause. He believed there were various cases which might be adduced where persons had made themselves liable to pu - niflunent for having solemnized marriages contrary to the letter of the act. He by no means < saw that the bill would ufurp. or encroach - upon the rights. of the Crown; 4t - would save the Crown, and those who might thinkut necessary; to apply to it, great trouble and expence, and infinite vexation; and if there - were any such persons as the learned Lord described, of which he retained his doubts, they could be but few in number; and even - in that case, it would be perfectly consonant to the spirit of the laws of England, and that well known maxim, that it is better; twenty guilty persons fhouldefcape, than one innocent person - suffer, which, must be the case though mercy should be extended to - them .; for in his opinion the very neceflity of the application, and the progrefs of it, might be well deemed a species of pu - nishment.

The Lord Chancellor - re - worded several of his - formerChau arguments; to which he added, that it was - the duty of « // » / ■. every clergyman - to be thoroughly acquainted with the law in question, because it was only under the special authority of that - law that he could undertake to perform the - marriage ceremony; ignorance or inattention, in respeCLto ' the authority under which he a£ted, was in some degree criminal, though not : perhaps to the extent it would, could it be proved that he acted fiom sinister or int - erected motives.

If he underflood noble Lords right, the clause was purposely framed to give relief to persons who had solemnized marriages in chapels which had been. ereCted since the passing of the law; but though nothing was more easy than to ailert generally, that clergymen in every inflance. of the kind a£ted. ignorantly or in advertently; he believed. in his confidence it might be. easily proved, that. many of them had acted from - motives originating in - avarice and self - interest.

The erecting, of chapels was pretty well Lnown to be. a builder’s job : the chapel was raised or contracted for, no. matter which; ifubscriptions were fought; it was properly furnished, and divine fe - rvice was performed in it. The. next objeCl was to enlarge the receipts as much as possible; and what method better calculated to effect that, than by encouraging young people to come there to be married, and defrauding thereby the mother church ' df her fair and legal dues ? AU this, it was. barely possible, might proceed from

Y y % ignorance

3# PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781 *

ignorance; but he believed, without stretching the imputation too far, it was much more likely to proceed from intention, and from a most corrupt and fraudulent intention too. He was entitled to prefume as well as the noble Yifcount. He was entitled to say, that not only the law had made the acte felony, but that it was morally, as well as legally, criminal.

lA. Stirment Lord Stormont confcffed himself totally ignorant of the bu - finefs, farther than what he had collected in the course of the debate; and he was confident it amounted to an ex post faBo law, for pardoning an extensive description of felons, Which would be an ulurpation of one of the dearest prerogatives of the Crown, that of administering relief to the innocent, and even of extending in some case mercy to the guilty. Such being his opinion, he was, he said, determined, to vote again# the clause.

A long qonverfation across the table enlued between the Lord Chancellor, and Lords Dudley, Coventry, and Radnor.

.. At length the question was put, and the committee di - 1

vided. Contents for the clause, as it flood in the bill, 7; not - conterits 8. Dr. Hurd, bishop of Worcester, divided for the clause, but his Lordship not being robed, the teller refufed to count him in; we preiume, agreeably to a standing order of the House.

.. The bill was then read through, the blanks filled up, and the amendments ordered to be received next day.

The House rofe at fix o ’ clock,

June 26.

This day the House resolved itfelf into a committee on the Hie of Man bill. As soon as Lord Sandys had taken the chair, Mr. Lee was heard as counlel for the bill, which he did very fully, in a speech of nearly two hours. He was followed by Mr. Erlkine on the lame fide, who offered to j bring evidence to the bar in proof of several of the facts j stated, in the argument of his learned leader. j

The Lord The Lord Chancellor moved, that the counsel do with - Chancellor draw; and among others, fubmittedto their Lordihipsthe ! following observations

: The learned, gentleman, who spoke so ably at the bar, had endeavoured to make ' out his client’s case in a very singular manner. He scarcely said a syllable in behalf of the rights asserted in the bill, but confined his arguments solely in combating those of his aritagonifts, a species of perfuafion

A. 178. fi DEBATES.

which, with their Lordships, who fat there as the guardians and supporters of the public rights of the Crown, ' as well as the individual rights and priviledges of the subjects in the Isle of Man, he prefumed would never prevail. As to the event of the bill itfelf, he profeffed himself totally ' un - biassed and indifferent, farther than his anxiety led him to do what was right, and that only.

He was as ready to acknowledge as the moil sanguine friend of the noble Duke, within or without that House, that in making the agreement on the behalf of the Crown with the noble Duke’s father, that the bargain ought to have been liberally made, and the noble Duke fully recom - penfed. Whatever the prevailing opinion was at the time; at present signified very little. It was with an intention of prompting great public benefit; and since Parliament had adopted the idea they did on the occasion, such an agreement ought not to be conducted with that limited and pariimo - nious hand which governs property in trarifaftions of a private nature.

As to his own part, however singular such an opinion might found, what the public purchased of the late Duke of Athol seemed to him of very little eonfequence, no more in - his apprehension than certain rights and priviledges incident to the proprietor for the time being, as first magistrate and as lord of the foil; and which, his Majesty’s servant, in th. e year 1765, very wifely deemed to be improper to be longer veiled in the hands of a subject, who e. xercifed those rights independent of, and uncountrouled by, the British. Parliament.

That there were a variety of instances, previous to the year 1765, in which the Lord of Man, and those who livect under his government, were amenable and controulable by the British legislature, he prefumed would not be denied, because Parliament had at various times exercised a supreme, controuling power over the ifland. One instance he fhotild mention so early as the reign of Henry VIII. which would supply the want of every other proof on the subje£h

The Parliament which passed the ilatut ' e for abolifiiihg monafteries and abbies, and veiling the lands which belonged to them in the Crown, was extended to those religious houses as well in the Isle of Man as to England and Wales; and as a proof how little the sovereign of Man affe£led the real {file of a monarch, the Earl of Derby, who then possessed the roya ] ty, instead of exclaiming against the ufurpationv or

complaining

349 '

3$o PARLIAMENTARY A. 178, 1,

, complaining of the injustice or oppression of such a stretch of foreign power, actually became leflee to the Grown, for. the profits urifing from the dissolved abbies and monaftries within his own dominions.

Therefore in his opinion, there could exist no just ground of complaint agunft Parliament in the year 1765, though they had carried matters with a much higher hand than they I •really had done. All that Parliament stood pledged to per - form was, to what file is. always. obliged to do; to render j justice to the proprietor, by giving him a fair, equitable, I and liberal compensation, for what he really parted -. with. I Much had been urged both within and without the bar, in 1 order to prove, that the family of Athol had been injured; 1 that they had been forced into a surrender of what they deem - 1 ed inalienable, by the strong hand of power; and that the I agreement after being forced upoh them, had not been. faith. fully adhered to on the part of the Crown; indeed they were 1 the only two matters urged, which bore the appearance of I argument. The first, he believed, he had clearly placed in I a proper view, and as to the 1 aft, which was the immediate I ground of the present bill, it remained to be proved. No - 1 thing like proof had been offered, and till he was better con - vinced than by a general conversation at the bar, he must 1 confess, he found himself obliged to draw a conclusion ex - a£lly the reverfe. 1

Much had been said likewise about waifts, strays,. mane rial I rights, &c. whereas it appeared to have no real foundation Whatever; those rights which had been thus claimed, having, at j different times, and upon various occasions, been granted to the lords of, manors, and of -. cpnrfe. di veiled opt of the Lord - paramount.

, His Lordship,. after ^ adverting, to a great variety of circumstances of a similar. nature, reminded their Lordships, that they were now preparing. to enter. into the farther con/idera - tion of the bill on the 26th of June; that they, had yet. pro - j ceeded but a little way in it; that therefore, in his opinion, j to enable them to come to a true judgement upon a subject j in itfelf. complex, and rendered much more so by the manner in which it had been conduced, would take much more time than they could poffibly bellow on the subject at so very advanced a period of the fession.

The Duke of Athol said he perfectly coincided with the v noble and learned Lord, that the bill was of singular importance, and claimed every. degree of attention which bills of

the

A. 1781. DEBATES. 351

tliekind were naturally intitled to; for his part, there was not a noble Lord who heard him, that more fiqcerely wilh - ed every particular clause, even every particular sentence or paragraph in the bill, was watched with the most vigilant eye, and examined in the most minute manner; because, the more pains there were taken to develope the real purport and objects of the bill, he was perfuaded, the mor& friends ’ and supporters it would have in the House.

It was his interest therefore, to embrace the idea which had been thrown ^ out by the noble and learned ' Lord, as he had not the good fortune to bring home conviction to his Lord Chip’s mind, by any thing which had been offered by his counsel at the bar, or by any other means in the course of the progrefs of the buiinefs. He begged leave to assure the noble and learned Lord, that he was as ready as his Lordship to poftpone the farther consideration of the bill till next fession, as by that time, he made no doubt, but he should have it fully in his power to bring such proofs as would convince their Lordships in the most clear and in - equivocal manner, that the bill was ftri£Hy founded in justice, arid every way worthy of their Lordships approbation.

Earl Bathurst observed, that the noble Duke had held a Earl Ba - language every way becoming his high rank and dignity; his lburfi ' so readily closing with the sentiments of the noble and learned Lord, had done him infinite credit, and his candour, as to the mode of acceptation, could not surely be surpassed.

He perfectly agreed with the noble and learned Lord, that the season was rather too far advanced to come to a decision of such importance, and in which it was apprehended, the rights and property of so numerous a body of people might be materially affe£red. He would therefore, in conformity to the apparent sense of the House, move, Ct that the chairman do leave the chair. ” The committee was accordingly dissolved, and the buiinefs of course poftponed till the next fession of Parliament,

June 27.

As soon as prayers were over, the order of the day for the House to resolve itfelf into a committee on the Coventry Election Bill, was read; Lord Sandys accordingly took the chair of the committee.

An introdu&ory conversation. took place *, previous to any jJifculfion of the bill, in which several Lords took a part ;

among

4

3 53

P A R L I A M E - N T A R Y

A. 1781.

' The Lord Chancellor «

JjOTaLough -

hcrt, itgb‘

among the rest, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Loughborough, and the Lords Temple, Radnor, Dudley, and one or two other. '

The Chairman proceeded through several clauses till he came to the following. —ee And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after the passing of this aft ^ no greater fee than three shillings, over and above the expence of the necessary stamps, shall be demanded or taken of any person oK, persons, who shall be admitted to his or their freedom at any such council. ”

The Lord Chancellor objected to this clause on several ' grounds, but he principally contended, that the rights and properties of individuals should never be taken away by an aft of the legislature, unless it vvasJthe express, avowed, and particular purpose and object of the bill so to do; and even j in that case, when such an alteration in the laws in being became necessary, it should either be proved, that the right ] or property lb exercised or poflTefted was either ufurped, and j had no legal foundation to support it; or, that having a legal foundation to support it. Provisions should be made in the bill, which took those rights away; to make a full and equitable compensation.

The city of Coventry enjoyed certain corporate rights, and emoluments of a particular nature were annexed to Tome of those fights; among others, which was the particular case that, was or would be affected by the present clause, the corporation received certain fees from ail persons on the taking up their freedom. Thole emoluments, however applied, were understood to be designed for the benefit and advantage of the corporation; but whether the fees so paid were so applied to the general uses of the corporation, or annexed to the offices enjoyed by certain members of the body politic, the efteft was the fame; they could not be taken away by a fide wind; they must be first proved in a court of law to have no legal existence; or if divested out of the corporation, or any o ' f the individuals. who composed it, by an aft of the legifla - ture, it was incumbent upon the fair and equitable equivalent.

Lord Loughborough controverted the general doctrine, and denied the application of it to be just in the present instance, though the doctrine itfelf had been maintainable. He contended that the righs of a corporation were not to be deemed personal, or intitled, if taken away, to be compensated for. They were intended for the regulation of police and good

government

legislature

to give them a

353

A. xj8i. DEBATES.

government; they were consequently under the controul and ultimate clireftion of Parliament, whole special business and duty it was to watch over and take care that those delegated or subordinate powers vefted in corporations should not be abused or directed to the effecting improper purposes.

Parliament were supposed to aft, on the present occasion, both correftively and preventatively; to correct the evil in the first instance, and to prevent the return of it in time to come. The case in fast, his Lordship said, was this : In ancient times, so late as the reign of queen Elizabeth, ' the admission fine or fee paid by a freeman on ad million was but six - pence. In the year 1734 this was rai. fed ( or recognized by a public aft of the corporation ) to fix shillings and eight - pence ^ including the price of the damp. - In the year 1754 the corporation made a by - law, or regulation, to make it ten shillings and six - pence. The present bill had done no more than reducing it to a sum equal to v ^ hat had been fixed by the regulation ot 1734, independent of the damp.

He begged leave to make two observations upon the consequences of rejefting or altering the present claule; one was, that by railing the fine at pleasure, it was - acknowledging a right in the corporation to levy money - upon the subject, which was what no body of men had a right to do, unless authorised by law; but more particularly, if the present clause was amended, it would, in fast, mod probably defeat the whole bill, and that might be the design of the present opposition. If noble Lords were willing to run the rilk of Jofing the bill intirely, for the fake of making the amendment, under the circumstances he had described, he, for one, Ihouldi be for supporting the clause as it now dood.

The Lord Chancellor warmly urged his former argument; Lord and said, if the rights and properties of men were to be decided teller, upon, and disposed of in that House, or elsewhere, in their legislative capacity, there would > be - then an end to all. law and judice. He denied that the point under controversy to be a matter of mere police and regulation, upon which Parliament, in its legislative capacity, was competent to decide; it was a species of corporate property, created by prescripiton. or pofitive law, derived under the charter. If the corporate powers were abused, there was a remedy at lawif they were not, it became necessary to alter or modify ihem. The emoluments arising or accruing under this, legel title, if taken away, challenged compensation, ^ tfor could be diveded out of the corporation, without manifed injustice. He was ready to meet the noble Lord fairly; he was willing to allow, that Vol. I, Z z ' the

£$4 PARLIAMENTARY A. 1783V

the object of this clause was, to prevent a supposedevil, that of preventing persons intitled to take up their freedom, by increasing the expence of ad million, to a sum beyond the ability of the person withing to be enrolled. In that point of view, he had no objection to let the clause go in its present form, if its friends would content to have a proviso enacted, to save the rights of all the parties,

Duke of The Duke of Grafton totally coincided with the learned Grafton. Lord who fpoifce last, and recommended an amendment, saying the prescriptive and other rights of the corporation, and the persons claiming to be admitted,

Lori Chttn - The Lord Chancellor, after passing some very bandfome celhr. compliments on the noble Duke, respecting his constitutionaj knowledge; and his sacred regard for the due and impair tial administration of j uftice, adopted the words of the noble Duke, and moved them by way of amendment.

Duke of The Duke of Chandoia /poke again ft the clause, and in fa, Chwdoii. vour of the amendment, and condemned the principle of the hill, which Hated a variety of acts of a criminal nature, against persons adtingin the corporation of Coventry, and yet no one proof of the prefumed criminality had been made out, nor one person punished, in confecjuence of fpch misbehaviour.

Ld. Dudley. Lord £ ) udley taid, the corporation had no right to make

by - laws, which went to raise money on the citizens; and that no custom was good, the origin of which could npt be traced, which was plainly proved from the corporation books to iy ? the case in the present instance.

Lord Lord Sandwich spoke on the fame fidej said, though the

Sandwich, amendment made by the noble and learned Lord could he supported, any alteration ip the money part of the bill would probably prove fatal to it in the other House. He should bp that ground be against the amendment; not but he was of opinion, independent of that copfiderationi the amendment was totally upnecellary.

. After some farther consideration, the qpeftion was put on the Lord Chancellor’s amendment, and the committee dir vided; contents ii ? not contents 5 5 the clause was therefore carried.

Xd Temple - Lord ' Tempi ? moved. an amendment relative to the ( pecifica - tion of a penalty of i0Ql. to be paid by the corporation of refusing to admit any perfprj duly intitled to take up his free -

' ' ' # ’ ‘ don !

. Av ' iySzk D £ B A T E - 8 3SS

dom; which, after a short conversation, was negatived the contents being 9, not contents 16k

His Lordship propdfed a second amendment, which was negatived without a division.

The Duke of Chandois then moved, that the Chairman do Duke of leave the chair. This produced a long conversation of \\tK\tCbandoi, ‘ moment.

The Earl of Sandwich opposed the ’ motion very warmly, Earl of and endeavoured to ( hew ' the extreme neceffity there Was for Sand - mkh. passing the bill. The city of Coventry, whenever an oppofi - tion arose, had, time immemorial, been the scene of the moll; dangerous and daring riots, lives had been loft in many in - stances, and great mischiefs bad ever attended the elections.

The late one, had if poflible surpassed all that went before.

Under such circumstances, he wished noble Lords to consider whether it was not full time for the legislature to interfere; or whether the rights of election were to be sacrificed to brutal rage and violence ? In fine, whether their Lordships would think proper to perpetuate the injury and injustice of such proceedings, and the disgrace which would neceffarily attend them ? He. should first mention one circumstance before he fat down, to demonstrate with what rage and violence those riots were conduced. It was at one of them, a noble Lord; a member of that House, ( Denbigh ) had been dragged through the public streets and channels of the city, and otherwise maltreated, to the mahifeft danger of his life.

The Duke of Chandois’s motion was negatived, and the clauses were read without meeting with any farther oppofi - tion, and immediately reportedj and the bill ordered to be - read a third time.

The House roie at half after fix, and adjoured to the next day.

junjg 28 *

A bill from the other House, for giving a compensation to Do&or Smith for his attendance, in his medical character at the fev&ral prisons in and immediately about this metropolis, being, first presented, and read a first time, Viscount Dudley. moved, that laid bill be read a. second time on Thursday next.

The Duke of Chandois. said, he had many solid objections Duke of to make against the bill, and without entering into a detail, Chandm. he totally disapproved of its principle, which called upon their Dordships without any reason whatever to throw away

X i % twelve

35$ PARLIAMENTARY Av i78t.

twelve hundred pounds of the public money. He should therefore refill the bill in the Jirft instance. His Grace accordingly moved, that the bill be read a second time on Tuef - day four weeks. '

Ld. Dudley. ! Lord Dudley in a reply, of rather considerable, length, went into the whole of the merits of the bill, and of the conduit of Doctor Smith throughout the whole business.

Duke of - The Duke of Chandois said, if he had. retained a doubt re - Char. doh. lative to Doctor Smith’s claim upon Parliament, the noble i Viscount had, furnished him with the most cogent reasons for adhering to his former opinion. Doifor Smith, fays the noble Viscount, did not thruft himself officioully into the bu - finefs; he did not seek to perform voluntary services with a view of being. afterwards rewarded. No; Do&or - Smith, fays the noble Viscount, was prevailed upon to vifit the prisons at the request or desire of a member, of, th. e other House. He should be glad to know the member’s name who had undertaken - to employ the Doctor ? for he was. yet to learn, what authority a member of the legiflatu. re, had, to employ any man, and as, it were to pledge the faith, of Parliament for his ultimate reward. .,. -

■ He begged noble Lords to reflect on the present fiate of our - nadonal affairs, and fee fairly, - whether thiswas a time to add to the weight of taxes and loans, the people were necef - larily obliged, to fu. stain, and the Hill greater burdens, which must be the conference of a war - which at present held out not the mbit distant prolpeit of peace, -. He believed there was not a single noble Lord that heaixfhim, who would not join in one voice in recommending the most rigid oecouom. y.. He called the whole a job, calculated to serve a favoured individual, at the expence of an exhausted public, already bleeding at every pore.

Ld. Dudley. Dudley said, ' he perfectly agreed with the noble Duke

J respecting the extreme neceffity there was for adopting, the most rigid oeconomy in all financial concerns '. The principle was not to be controverted, but it might n ^ vertheless be improperly applied, as was the case, - if he. apprehended right, in the present instance. Moneyrwas always judiciously and ! properly laid out when it was given as the re ward. of public benefits actually received, that could not be laviftied or ' ‘ thrown away, which was given as a reward for ’ services ac -

tually performed; that this was the, case of DoctorjSmith, ' no person, he prefumed, entertained the, leaft doubt; he was therefore for having the bill go to that stage in which it

would

A 1781.

3 > E B A T E

357

would be competent to give proofs of what now could only rest upon assertion. /

The noble Duke called the bill a job; he infreated their Lordships not to be caught by a popular word. The name of job, without apy proof of its being To, had often turned out to be fatal; for a deaf ear; was instaritly turned to arguments, no matter, - how/cogent and, coriclusive, and all appeals to reason and facts; were instantly at an end. After some farther. observations; merely personal, stating the part he had ’ taken in the business, he hoped their Lordships would at leaft endeavour to be convinced that the bill was not a job, and not, by taking the charge for ' granted, reject the bill before it came. to asecond reading.

The Duke of Chandois rofe; to explain; he fald he never imagined, much lefs infinuated, : that; the noble Viscount had cbandoh any personal interest or concern, in the fate - of the bill, but be it a job or not, he was determined ' to relift in every / shape; ~any attempt however specious, which should have for its pbjeft the misapplication of the public money.

The Earl of Radnor observed, that there was one < point Earl ofRad - which must prove fatal to the bill, if there existbd no other objection whatever, and which. in his opinion was impossible to get over ., The services said to have. been performed, as stated in the bill were, that Doctor Smith had vilited, ‘attended, and otherwise assisted the lick in the several prisons within the counties of Middlesex and Surrey. There was not one of their Lordships who did not well know that services of this kind were rewarded and defrayed by the respe&ive ' counties. .. He could therefore fee no reason why the whole kingdom; should be obliged to contribute to the payment of expenc. es. incurred withinthofe. two counties, unless the rule were meaijt to be made general and extend over the whole kingdom; that not being yet declared, it was, in his opinion, little better than. intuiting Parliament, to make provision for what had been ’ already by law settled and established to be provided for in another manner.

The Earl of Hilljborough profefied himself totally unac - EariofH ? //, ^ quainted with the bill and every part of it, or indeed lie be - borough. lieved with the name till he heard the title now; read. If the noble Duke’s motion should be adhered to, he should be clrove to this, dilemma, of saying content or not content. He wilhed therefore to know on which fide to vote, for at present it would be impossible for him, informed1 as he was, to give a YOte either way. He therefore recommended ’ to the.

noble

v ’ (

$$$ PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

noble Duke to withdraw his rrjotion, and permit the bill to be sent to a committee, where its merits or demerits might be - fully difcutfed, and theclaim, ifany, of Do£lor Sinith be fairly ascertained.

The Lord ^ The Lord Chancellor made a very pointed reply, and entered Chance or. into tjje nature of the bill, which as he proceeded he more fully explained. He concluded with givinghis hearty assent to the motion made by the noble Duke.

JJ ! 1®JEarlof The Earl of HillJhorough replied with some warmth. He 1 fioreugbhe disdained the pitiful idea of voting away the property of other people, and then making a merit of liberality, as much as, the noble and learned Lord; but he nevertheless wilhed the bill to proceed to a feeond reading, and then to a committee; when, if it should appear that the objections to ' - the bill were well founded, he should be one of the foremost in reprobating it.

The Duke The Duke of Chandots laid, his obje£Hon was not to the ° ^ ‘provisions but to the principle of the bill, and that because it would be a squandering away of the public money : he should therefore meet it on the principle, by adhering to liis original motion.

The question was then put and carried; his Grace ' s motion corifequently agreed to, and the bill of course reje&ed. without a division.

The other order of the day was then read for the feeond reading of an engrossed bill from the Commons, entitled. An act for granting to a Mr. Philips the ^ Turn of three thousand fix hundred pounds, for difeoyering a composition or powder for destroying weevils, cock - roaches, and Other kinds of vermin, which prove very pernicious in the naval and other provisiori stores, where great quantities of bread, biscuit, and other, the provisions necessary for consumption a - board ships of war, in camps, &c. are used, as well, as in gardens, pineries, hot - houses, &c.

This occasioned a debate, which was carried on for several hours with. great heat between, the Lord Chancellor and Lord Sandwich. The former being as warm in condemning the principles and provisions of the bill as the latter was in 1 defending them.

' ebon lhr The Lord Chancellor in his first speech opposed the bill, erce or, c ^ e - gy on three grounds : First, that there was no evidence before the House, sufficient to induce their Lordships to pass the bill, nor one promifed but what, from the state of it as announced amounted to no evidence at ail. Secondly,

the

3

hi 1781. DEBATES. Sri

he evidence talked of wanted certainty, and Jpecification, ind dealt only in generals. And, laftly, that the House yas called upon to vote the public money, not upon proofs Anally had, or existing, but in contemplation, that they night hereafter be made out.

Earl Bathurst, who moved the second reading of the bill ^ fthurb. "aid, it was. impossible to judge of the merits of the bill in a u - foe present stage. All the proofs it was true could not be idduced before the passing of the bill; but there was a clause - in the bill which obviated any objection on that account as out of the three thousand fix - hundred pounds to be granted, '

Ur. Philips was to receive but fix hundred pounds till after the whole of the proofs were made out.

The Duke of Grafton ' s argument again# the bill was, Duke that if the discovery was of the infinite importance. and ' pub ^ G ? r ^ < ” lie benefit it was represented to be, it would be doing in - justice to the author, for ' it would prove a very inadequate compensation, when compared with the pecuniary advantages lie might derive from it, under the sanction of a patent or monopoly; where, if the faffs stated were to be depended upon, he mu# amass a very considerable fortune in a few jjfears. Abandoning so fair a profpeffc of gain, and enormous gain too, as such a monopoly mu# ensure, were the grounds w. or motives for passing the present bill to be relied upon, he had every reason to conclude, that the di ’ lcoverer had taken the mo# wife and prudent course; being conscious, that either the whole was a bubble, or that he was not confident of iuccefs; nor had fully proved by experiment what he wished might poffibly happen.

Lord Sandvuiph ) role in reply to what had fallen from thel ' ^

Lord Chancellor and the Duke of Grafton in the precedingSaniviich > art of the debate.

Before he entered into the subjeff, his Lordship stated the liirnerous mischiefs and the detriment the public suffered iom the vermin prpposed to be destroyed by this new. invent ion. He read a lift of those lofTes, as stated to him by fe - reral of the inferior boards, and contrafted those Ioffes with in account of the experiments which had been made on the owder, and how very successful those experiments had roved.

His Lordship proceeded to answer the objection ' s he had card stated, he said, by the noble Lord on the woolfkck, ad the noble Duke in the blue ribbon [ Grafton ],

The

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781,

The noble/and. learnedLord took a very summary way of getting rid of the bill, without putting himself to any trouble whatever, either in respect of proof or argument. His Lordship had recourse to generals, but carefully ab - stained, for very obvious reasons, from entering into particulars. The learned Lord talked of the latenefs of the season, of the advanced period of the fession, just approach - : ing to a conclusion. This, if a good objection, held equally i against the farther prosecution of public business, let it be of ever such great importance, or carried no weight at all with it; for it amounted to this, that the importance of the object ought to be taken into consideration, and if it was worthy of the attention he thought it was, which could only be decided ^ by enquiry and investigation, then every conclusion drawn to the disfavour of the bill, on account of the advanced period of the session, was clearly at an end. For his part, he thought the bill of very great importance, eonfequently he could pay no attention to that particular objection.

The learned Lord had conjured up another objection to the bill, which his Lordship, predi£fced must ’ prove fatal, That was, the distrefled state of the country, the enormous expences of the war, and the necessary burdens which were the consequence of them; of course the rigid oeconomy which became necessary in such a state of things, and moreover the impropriety of giving away money which was destined for public Services, and the applying it to private ' purposes.

He would endeavour to give each of, these a separate and djftinft answer. This objection, like the foregoing, was taken up on general ideas. He hoped this country was not f o far reduced as to have its finances materially affedVed by qhe sum proposed to be given to the inventor; but if the learned Lord’s objection was founded, that he would not have objected tb the bill, if the money, raised upon the people was applied to the purposes for which it was granted, that is, for public services, he was ready to say and prove, that the objection was answered, for the present bill would do no more. It would dispose of such a sum of money under the ' sanction of Parliament, for promoting a great public benefit, which, if he understood anything. of the phrafej came precifeiy within the description of public services.

His Lordship relied much on the authority on which the grounds of the present bill was founded, particularly the

coipmissioners

.. '. j

A. pfc. 1 > £ 6 A T fc S. 36,

tommiffiahers of the vi£toatIing - ofEce, and a captain of a mail of - war ( we. believe ? & Ckptaiii Dalrymple ), who had tried the experiment, and who“fpoke largely and pofirively bf the efficacy of the powdefs.

• Tfhis ^ surely was a species of evidence which ought riot tb fee rejected till heard; or until itfikould upon hearing be pro - riouriced tob ’ weak or irrelative. It was impossible to decide upori it in this fiage. of the bill, arid of course he trolled the learned Lord Would riot be against having vyitnesses called to the bar arid examined, should the Horife think proper td fend the bill to a committee.

He was of opinion, clearly, ' that the present bill, was well entitled to the ihbft feribus attention of the House .; that it was apublic objeCfc of considerable importance; and that it challenged, in a peculiar manner, the protection and patronage of their Lordships in the {tile and manner it pre - i fented itfelf.

Parliament were the guardians of the nation; it was their duty to promote every beneficial scheme offered to their consideration; and not, upon mere general objections, unfounded suggestions, and vague arguments, pre - determine.

Without enquiry, what they were only competent, to decide upon clear and satisfaCtory proof.

; There was nothing which came under his cognizance in the departnffent over which ' he had the honour td preside,

. that more employed his thoughts and exertions to effect than that of preserving the health of the seamen; and when - ever such am object came in view, he should for one think it extremely improper, if not impolitic, to oppofe the expence it might put the nation to, to so great arid wilhed - for an object as. that of keeping our seamen in a fiate of health, to enable them to perform their duty, and to prevent : that mortality which; was ever the consequence p£ n % le£t, and had always proved so ruinous and destruCliye to the service. -

It might, for instance, with equal justice be imputed to hitn, that he had lately put the nation to a very considerable additional expence in the article of four - crout, which he had givemdifeCtions to have served aboard his Majesty’s ships q£ war. But after having made rhe ' most diligent and fatjf - faCtory : enquiries *, being fully convinced that four - crout was one. of the greatest. anti - fcorbutics ever invented, or antidote against ' those disorders which seamen, from the nature of the service, are subject, he no longer fcefitated I, Vol. I A a a about

362 P A R LIA M ENT A R : Y A. 1781

about, the additional expence, nor was he prevented, by notions of an ill - timed and impolitic ceconomy, to consult the real good of the service. On the contrary, he had ruil a rifque of falling under the animadverhons of those who delight to find "fault, and are ever ready to suggest the most unfavourable consequences; and took, as he ever should, when the interests of his foverclgn and his country required ^ a most. active part, never shrinking, or wishing to fh -. ink, from the responfibility which ever accompanied acts of office which were not sanctioned by the ufdal form.

The noble Duke in the blue ribbon resommcc ied a patent. He confessed he had always been an enemy : o iro -. jpolies of every kind; they had in the end aim oft always proved detrimental to the public. If they lucceeded, the patentee was left at liberty to raise his price at his pleafufe : indeed they seldom did succeed; and when they did, it was next to im - poffibie to ascertain the difference between the original and the numerous counterfeits which were made in consequence of it so that while the patentee was robbed of the fruits of his invention, the public were ' cheated by a set of adventurers and impoftors.

The learned and noble Lord was for deferring the bill till next session; but in his opinion, considering the peculiar distreffes Mr. Philips laboured under, it would in the event amount to a complete negative. The sum which he was to - touch, was but fix hundred pounds till after the efficacy - of

the powder had been satisfactorily and ultimately proved; j and even suppofing the worst, that the powder should not answer in every particular instance predicted, he could not fee that such an advance, upon proofs already given, would, ' in the language of the noble and learned Lord, amount to an enormous and shameful wafte of public money.

His Lordship concluded with alluring the House, that the naval and other inferior boards in his department, so confident were they of the efficacy of the powder, that they had already purchased it in great quantities; and he; understood so far as trials had been made and the effects ascertained, the powder had answered the most sanguine expectations.

Duke of \ The Duke of Grafton observed, that if, as the noble Earl Grafton. had stated, the powder. Had hitherto in every trial proved so very efficacious, and if such great quantities had been tried, v and tb great a demand created in consequence of the success of thoke trials, Mr. Philips, the inventor, could not poftibly be the distressed man he had. been described by tha noble - v '. -. Earl.

A. 1781. - E > E B A T E S. ' ’ 363

Earl; The profits on the sale mull : bear some rea/onable proportion to the quantities fold; and if there was no doubt of the success of the powder nor of the vent, itfurnished the most cogent reason for deferring the bill to another year.

The noble Earl, with a spirit and candour that is natural to him, fays, he never stands at trifles or rifques when the public service is likely to be benefited. In the present in - stance, his Lordship does not entertain a Angle doubt of the success of the discovery. Why not then act throughout with the fame liberal spirft he should when his Lordship first rofe

Why not atonce purchase such a quantity of the powder, for the ufe of the navy, as may for the present relieve the difeoyerer from his embarrafiments, and defer the bill till a period when Mr. Philips could have nothing to apprehend from Part liament, but a ready acquiescence in rewarding a man who had so materially benefited the public.

The Earl of Sandwich said, his situation did not permit him to sport with or" dispose of the public money; nor wu could he disburse a shilling without the previous appro - ? bation of Parliament. -

The Lord Chancellor came for the second time from the The Lord wooifack to his. place, and begun with observing, that : he had Chancellor ' the misfortune to be ' mifunderstood in what he said when he first rofe. He was charged with dealing in generals, and avoiding to enter into particulars; now, for his part, he imagined, t&at if any objection properly lay against his ar guments,. it was because they consisted of a regular series of particulars, in which general abstract reasoning had little or nothing to do.

His. first objection to the bill was, that the evidence was not such as to entitle it to their Lordships sanction. This, it was true, might be deemed a general objection, had he neglected to follow it up with specifying the several motives which induced him to be of that opinion. His reasons were numerous, and out of many which he urged he should just re - r mind the noble Lord of two or three. One reason was, that the fa£ts stated in the preamble were either not proved, or acknowledged, to be false. The noble Earl at the head of the council £Bathurftj con sessed as much, for he fairly acknowledged, with his usual opennefs and candour, that the experiments made upon vermin in gardens had in fist mifr carried. Here then he was at liberty to affirm that che preamble of the bill contained a faifehood on the very face of it; becaufg it stated > that Philips’s powder or compofirion was 3 — A a a 3 powder

PARLIAMENTARY 4 1781 ?

powder for the deftyuSion of caterpillars, flies, and other veiv win in gardens j whereas the experiments made warranted no such allegation. So far then. the noble Earl must acknowr ledge his mistake, when his Lordship charged him with dealing entirely in generals; for here was a particular objection, and a fatal one too, jinlefs the preamble should be amended.

The dther part of the preamble, relative to the weevils and cQck > roaches ? afforded hint Ph opportunity of Shewing tf ^ at he had not entirely relied upon general arguments $ for, if his memory fprved him right, he hadobje£ted to the evidence adduced in support of the efficacy of the powders in that instance, as we}l as the foregoing; for he would ever hold it parliamentary language, fit and becoming the fluty ahd dignity of that Hopfe, if any doubt arose respecting the species, competency, or grounds of proof which might haye induced the other to pass any bill, ' or the suggestions, opinions or motives which might have operated upon it, to act or determine an such and such a manner, that their Lordships were to take nothing upon trull : of authority, but were bound, as legifla - tprs and hpnpft men, to satisfy ti ^ eir ' own confcierices in endeavouring to get at. the truth. It was on this clear parliamentary ground that he flood, for he would defy the noble Earl, or any other noble Lord who heard him to say that House was in possession of a Angle fa& to prove the efficacy of the powder in destroying weevils and, cock - roaches, no more than the ants. Here was another particular objection j he would" proceed a flep farther, upon evidence which the noble Lord would, he prefumed, hardly attempt to controvert 5 ? io other than evidence drawn from the bill itfelf.

What does the bill say, or father what does it confess ? That po such discoyery has yet been duly pr satisfactorily proved. '

, ' The bill grppofes, in the fir# instance ? to give Philips ^ the supposed inventor, the sum of fix hundred pounds, out of a iupi of three thousand fix hundred pounds, intended for hjm at ibm ’ e future clay. What ! fix hundred pounds ! when the till fays, in another part, that the flifcovery has not onjy been made, but fully proved. The conduct of the bill in tt}is particular called for no comment; it was cpntradidlory and absurd. ' It fiatps that the jfifcovery has beep made, aiicj proved in part, and ' with - holfls the reward upon a prefump - tiohj or pp fibjlity3 £hat it has not been made nof provefl, - in another/ But to varnish oyey this abfhrdity, a most extraordinary flep of parliamentary management is devised. It js no lefs than the very decent request m$de to the legiflatiire -

• -. ... ■ tg

A, t$8i. D E B A "T j£ S.

to vote tl > re. e thousand fix hundred pounds as a reward for an eventual benefit; but at the fame time to delegate a power to another description of men, namely, the Navy or Victualling Boards, to dispose of the remaining three thousand, after making an advance, in, prafente, of the other fix hundred. This he was ready to declare was a direct infult upon Parliament, to call upon them to grant money in such a way; it was making them a mere registery of the Wiifies or designs of other mep, and desiring them at the fame time to divert themselves of the power of controuling the disposition of the money; for as fqpn as the bill parted. Parliament would have no more to say tp the disposition than if no such grant had ever parted that House. Here he would, make his particular, stand, and he trusted, that although no other objection existed, this alone would preyenf jhpir Lordships from giving their assent to the bili ? '

The noble Lord said, What ! oppofe the bill in this stage ? You call for evidence, but by refufing to fend it1 to a Committee you shut out every species of proof whatever. Tie wasperfuaded there was not a noble Lord that heard him, however willing they might be to fend the bill to a Committee, who would not acknowledge that nothing more could come opt in the Committee than what their Lordships were already jn possession of; suggestions, expeditions, and probabilities, of vybat mightor might not hereafter turn out to be true. If the noble Lord who spoke so long and so ably in favour of the bill would boldly come forward, and say, that he had fetter ' ^ nd more relative proof to lay before the Committee, then to be sure all ppposition in this stage of the bill ought; to be at end; but the frame and whole texture of the bill > ave the fulleft proof that no such thing was intended; of : he contrary, the bill was framed upon supposition; the allegations taken upon supposition j and, if it should meet with heir Lordships concurrence, must be parted upon supposition.

The noble Lord had spoke with his usual energy and volatility in reprobating ie the poor ideas of a narrow and short - ighted policy, in dealing out, with a niggardly and trem - - ling hand, the public money, when the welfare of the nation equired a most liberal, generous, and grateful conduct, ' ublic services, said a noble Lord -, whatever the situation of lis ppuntry may be represented by its, public or concealed nemies, wgre great, powerful, and flouriftnng. ’ V - rSo Tar a§ ie afiertion went to maintain the ability of this country to ipet het neighbouring eriemies, he entirely coincided in fen - inent with the noble Lord. hip man cou}d be moreperfedt -

366

PARLIAMENTARY A. ijSi.

Jy perfuaded of the great rcfources of this country than he ! was. He knewihe abounded in native and acquired strength, ] and entertained not a tingle doubt but her finances were such j as would enable her to carry on a war, against all those con - j federated against her, for several years to come; but when I this abftraCt proposition came to be applied to the existing j subject under their Lordships consideration, it called for some j explanation. i

What does the bill say ? that the sum carved out is to be ! drawn from the supplies granted the present fefilon of Par - ] liament; so far then, on the face of it, it takes the money I already appropriated for public services, and applies it to a t private purpose j for until proof were made of the efficacy of the powder, he should ever consider the present a private gra - ( fiuicy, destined to a private purpose.

Now, whatever the noble Lord might think respecting pub - i lie generosity and public gratitude, in his apprehension the obligation and the objeCl ought to be first ascertained. Mr. I Philips, after all the noble Lord had said in his praife, he I had no room to doubt was a very ingenius and deserving man j but still his deserts were of a private nature, unleTs in rela - 1 tion to the noble Lord and a few of his friends. He honoured I the noble Lord for the warmth of his friendships; but fitting a as he did there, in his public capacity, he could never per - f fuade himself to reward a man publicly, that is, with the public money, till he had done something for the public to I deserve it. j

If he understood any thing of taxes, supplies, or of the ] public revenue, it originated in this simple and clear princi - j pie, which he trusted no person who heard him would con - ] trovert, that the public contributed a certain part of their in - I dividual property in the expectation, and for the purpose of j deriving thereby some actual or probable benefit. Apply this j maxim to the case before their Lordships, and they would j perceive that they were equally bound, by every principle of justice, honour, and true generosity, not to dispose of or grant away the money entrusted to their care, but upon the terms on which only they were competent to give it.

He did not confine his objections merely to the largenefs or finallnefs of the sum ( ought; it was the example, it was the principle chiefiy against which he would, as long as he lived, fteadiiy set his face : for he Was firmly perfuaded, from the several attempts made of late years in this way, that applications would become every fefilon. more frequent; that the public money would be laviftied, and nnt barely thrown

' away,

4

A. 1781. DEBATE S.

away, but bestowed upon the most worthlefs apt ! undcferving; men, perhaps, who had no other claim but what the confci - oufnefs of having feme powerful friends to support them first suggested.

Their Lordships had a very recent instance iri respect of a bill they had just disposed of; a bill from the other Honfc, tiefiring their Lordships to give a Dr. Smith 1200I. not for services to be done, but which had been actually performed But how did this claim originate ? Why, thus; the prisons in the counties of Middlesex and Surrey were or were not neglected; for as to the claim, it was not necessary to determine. Well, Dr. Smith offers his services, or is delired by a member of the other House, lince deceased ( Sir Charles Whitworth ) - to attend the prisons in thofc two counties. The doctor executes his commission, and comes, to Parliament with a demand of 1200I. for his trouble; though there is a provision made by law in each county and all over the kingdom for the very purpose. Their Lordships had, however, very properly rejected the request; for most clearly, if they had not, there would not be a single county, town, or city in the kingdom in which some other doCtor would not Hart up, and the tables of both Houses soon be covered with apothecaries bills and prescriptions; and a precedent for neglect on one fide, and jobbing on the other, would be fully established, upon no better ground than that some member of the other House, or this House, had desired one man to perform the duty of another, and invited him to go to Parliament for his reward.

He was not disappointed in his expectations when the noble Lord rofe; he promifed to himself the pleasure of hearing a very full and warm eulogium upon all the boards which are connected with, or dependent - upon the very high department the noble Lord fb ably and honourably fills, with a panegyric upon particular persons who had the honour of his Lord - ship’s friendship. The noble Lord has done both; but however ready he was to pay the most implicit credit to every thing asserted by the noble Lord, as a member of that House, they amounted to no more than assurances that ought to be believed, so far as they related to jthe noble Earl himself; but in point of evidence, the saying, that the gentleman who fat at this or that board were persons of the best understand - ingsand of the most approved integrity, and that such an officer was no lefs known for his gallantry and fkili in his pro - fession; every tittle of this he was ready to subscribe to; but the integrity of one the abilities of a ieccnd, or the bravery

36S. PARLIAMENTARY A. i7fr *,

of a third, fell very short, in Kis apprehension, of proving the pretended efficacy of the powders.

The noble Lord had, after producing private or conventional evidence on the lubje£l, confidefably extended his views j he had not only proved in his own way the efficacy of the powder, but entered into a kind of dissertation upon that salubrious viand, four - crout. The noble Lord has told your Lordships, that he has put the nation to a very considerable expence in the article of four - crout : his Lordship has allured you, that being perfectly satisfied himself of its salubrious qualities, and of its almost miraculous effb&s in prefeving the health of the seamen, that he did not wait to take the the advice, or procure the previous sanction of Parliament ( nor, his Lordship might have added} of procuring a patent ) in its favour : No; his Lordship declares, that for the good of his country, which mull have in the mean time been deprived of the benefits deriveable from so valuable a succedaneum of health, he broke through the bond of common office forms, which are binding on ordinary occasions, and run the rifque of the event. His Lordship, as he always does when he acts on his own iuggeftions and judgement, acted with equal spirit and candour. He afled like a great mi - nifler; he took the responiibility upon himself; he purchased immenfe quantities of four - crout, thereby subjecting himself to the future approbation or disapprobation of Parliament. ■

His Lordship, after paying numerous other compliments in the fame Itile to the First Lord of the Admiralty, alternately pointing out his wifdom, spirit, and firm attachment to his country, made a few observations on the nature and obvious tendency of the bill.

The preamble,. as he observed before, his Lordship said, consisted of two parts, namely, die destru£tions of the caterpillars and other miichievous vermin in gardens, and of the weevils, cock - roaches, &c. in his Majesty’s provision llores, But more particularly among the provisiom aboard his Ma - jesty’s ships of war. They were, it was true, llrange names; ionie of which he had never before heard of The animals fb described were no iefs llrange in their nature : The whole bore a wonderful llrange appearance; for the operation of the powder on those animals was, if possible, more llrange than any other circumstance whatever.

The efie&s of the procefs and experiments made upon those cock - roaches, caterpillars, &c. as he understood, were

more

A1. h % B A T E S; 369

than firange; for they flrruclc him as truly extfaofdr - nary. TKe poor ' caterpillars, the ghrdenrinhabitants ', ' were hrft attacked j ' the ' powder wasr atiminiftfcred ' to them, or thrown in their Way. They grew lick, very lick indeed 1 but they unhappily recovered ., This" trial convinced thofeu who ' made1 it, ‘ that the powder was very good, llrong; and efficacious ;, but the patients were ' not of the right kind. ;

Others of ' a different constitution are now anxiously fought after by the discovererand his affistants; yet he has not been so fortunate hitherto as to find out ' th ’ e ’ kind of vermin he wants.

The noble ' Earl at the head of hif Majesty’s council acknowledges very ingenuoily, that the right subjects are not yet found. These are the latefb; accounts; and, it is pre - i fumed, may be relied on with confidence. As foop as they shall, your Lordships may depend upon hearing the happy aiul important tidings announced in due form, and ail the circumstances leading to ’ an event, of fuchconfecjuence authenticated from, the most respeffable authority.

His. Lordship, ., by, way of recapitulation, took a transient glance at the four - c ' rout, the noble Lords avowed fefponiibi - lity for the great - rifque htS ! Lordship run in ordering such vaft quantities of four - crout to be purchafi - d without the previous content of Parliament, and concluded a speech, which took a full hour and a half in the delivery, with professing his full ' difapprobacion of the principle, as well as provisiona of the bill.

Lord Dudley contended -; that granting Mr.. Philips - a mo - yori sjopoly would not be properly rewarding him for a public ^ benefit, as the service : expected would be of a public nature. Counterfeits, might defeat the, private advantages ^ and moreover, whatever demancf he - might have for his powder, it might be many. yeans : before he could reimbursebim - self for his great trouble ^ tail, and - expencei

The Duke of C ^ w replied, if the - amount of damage ilated, by the noble Ldtd iat ^ the head, of the Admiralty had raJtan been correctly given, apd thar the author was allowed only a reasonable pr ' ofit, his emolument would amount, td - more within a single year thaa the furn designed for him by this bill *

The Lord Chancellor fard, there - was one - objt&ion vsrbichV in Ccani his. apprehension, must prove - fatal to the bill even hr this ^ cr stage which, was ^ that" the : money was to be granted in pr ^ » fente, upon proofs of its efficacyto befnadein futuro.

tiordt Su ^ lkcdilod it ^ notariot ^ iand palpable ? job; said, cthe, great number of years he had fat in the other House, he Vol, L. B b b fcaicely

3. 75 PARLIAMENT A; R ¥ A. 1781 ^

scarcely ev Tremembered; a %, fession‘ in which - two or thrce : jobs of this ' kind w. er ^ ( npC,. Rttemptedy or carried through.. One instapce of it just - ftruclc. his mind j ., it. was. a man fronv Manchester, who. pretended. to bave discoyered a method of - dying cotton goods in a most extraordinary manner, Speci -; mens were, produced, and laid upon the table of the House of Commons. He examined them, and can felled they were most ' beautiful biit after. ' the fellow, had.. procured live thou - faqd poiinds for his wonderful discoyery, upon enquiry, he found out it was all a cheat, for the colours, as he was afterwards well informed, flew - in three or four days, and loft all their external beauty.

Xord Pre - ' The LordPrsJident laid,; it - would be. difrespectfu ] to the

jidint. cth ' ef House to rejedt the bill in this stage t that the money, though could not be disposed of till proofs of the

emcacy of the powder were fully made and established; and that the proper stage to decide upon evidence, if it should be wanted, was in the committee.

Puke of The Duke of Chandois taid a few words against the bill, Cher. dth. and moved, that the farther consideration of it should be ' put off till that day month.

The questlon being put, the House divided, contents io, not contents 21. The bill was then read a second time, and committed for the next day.

As soon as the debate was firiished, Mr. Fox, who had been present the whole time near the throne, came down be - ] qw the bar, and presented a bill for the repeal of certain '. clauses in the Marriage Bill, passed the 26th of late

King. '

The bill was ordered to be read a first time the next day, and the House adjourned at half after feveri o ’ clock.

,. June 29 ^

As soon as prayers were over, the order of the day for the third reading of the Coventry election. bill being read, a mo -, tion was made to add an amendment, ‘ which, after a short tonverfation, was agreed to, arid the fame was lent back to the Commons.

; The order of the day was then read, for the House to re - solve itfclf into a Committee on the bill for granting a cer -. .. tainbfum of money to Mr. : Philips, of Knightsbridge, for

his discovery of - a powder, or cqmposition, for. destroyrng weevils, cork - roaches, &c. in his Majesty’s provision stores, bothon. land and a ship - board, and caterpillars and other noxr - •ous vermin in garderis. - ^ Lord Sandys presided as - Chairman.

- - • ' Mr; Bate

. A tivSi,. D < E B A T E S. ' 37 >

; Mr > Bate, one of the Commissioners of the ' Vii&ualling Office, was examined, and from computations; which had ., b§en made in his department, it appeared ^ that so far only I as those computations reached, the damage amounted, within - the three last years, to fifteen thousand pounds. Other witnesses spoke to; some experiments made; but the evidence being objected to, as not coming, up to the allegations set forth in the bill. Lord Sandwiclvread a letter from a captain of a man of waj *, directed to Mr. Stephens, secretary to the Admiralty, in confirmation of what was deposed at the bar.

The Lord Chancellor ' objected to the receiving the fa id. letter Lord Chan -, as evidence. He observed, if letters were - to be brought for - celior ' ward in this way, a the pleasure of any noble Lord who might think proper to draw forth one out of his pocket, and authenticate the fame upon his word, there would be an end of all parliamentary proof; and the calling of evidence to support the allegations of a bill vvould be. no better than a mere farce. If such hearfay letters, at a second, or third scand, were to have any weight, they should be moved for regularly, and an address should go in form to his Majesty, to pray him to give direction, that, said letter or other paper be laid before the Houseas a parliamentary document.

After some farther conversation on the subject, of little or no consequence, it wag at length agreed to poftpone the farther consideration of the bill till Tuesday next.

One of the gardeners, who was to prove the ejfFe&s of the powders in his gardens, was absent, as was likewise Mr.

Hanway, one cf the Commissioners of the Navy or Viclual - ling - Office.

The biil for repealing certain provisions in the Marriage Act was read a firfftime,. and ordered to be printed.

The House rofe at half after fix o ’ clock, and adjourned till Monday.

July 2. \

The order of the clay wasfor taking into consideration the petition preferred from ' the American prisoners to that House to the Duke of Richmond, respecting government allowance of food and raiment. His. Grace, agreeably to promii ' e, took the petition off the table; and the fame being read, he ordered enquiry to be; made, whether the Commissioners of Sick and Hurt, or any of them, were in waiting and being answered by Lord Sandwich that ‘ Mr. Lulman attended, he was called to the bar and examined.

. ‘ B b b 2 - His

sjT ?, PARLIAMENTARY A. aSiSi.

His evidence was in substance, that he had vifited Mill - prison on the 5th of June ■, and found the prisoners in health and {pints; if they wanted clothes, it was because they dif - poled of them to the French For money; which happened to be particularly the case in the article of stockings. That if any complaint was made, it was instantly reipedied; and the American prisoners were clothed like the English sailors.

The foregoing evidence Dr. Farquharson corroborated. The only precedents the - Board had to retort to were tvyo. The one, the allowance made the rebel prisoners in 1745

' ' the other, the allowance made the Britishi soldiers on board

of transports. They found the first were granted four - peace per man per idem, which was laid out for them by the Commissioners of Sick and Hurt, in the purchal ’ e of one pound of bread, half a pound of meat, and a quarter of po : nd of cheese, without either peafe or beer. The Britishi Soldiers were - allowed a lei ' s proportion of bread, and some of the other articles, than the American prisoners, but > larger proportion of beer.

A question arose with fjie commissioners, how the Ame - rricans should be treated; and they at length ’ agreed ., upon the follovying allowance : — a pound of bread, a quart of small beer, three - quarters of a pound of meat, a portion of peafe, or greens instead of them, and either a ' piece of butter or a piece of cheese. This allowance, Do&orFar - ' quharfon said, had been determined ' on from the commencement of the war, and had been uniformly adhered to eve. r iincc .; '

p ike of THe examination being at an end, ’ the Duke of ^ Richmond ‘Richmond rofe and said, he took up the present business with no view whatever but to prevent the British character for liberality from being injured; it was that, he said, that rai. fed this country so high in reputation last war. All our victories weighed nothing in the scale ofJ consideration, in the eyes of foreign powers, compared to the tendernefs, the humanity, - and the kind manner in which we treated thbfe of our enemies whom the fortune of war had put into our power. He wished therefore, most anxiouily, to preserve - that high national reputation in its full splendour, and he wasiper - fuaded, that when no conftkutipnal questibn, no party principle was suffered to mix with a iubje&t of the fort with Ah $t before the House, and/when the appeal was solely directed to that nobleft of all Che feelings implanted in the breails of their Lordlhi [ f5 the impulfe of humanity 1 instead V ", 1 ' ' of

. L if % I. D E B A TT

;, of its befog neceflaryto ufe a number of words - ont - he occa fton an apology - was due to them ’ fop his using any to excite _ •thole feptiments‘Which all the world knew to cbe uppermost sof all tljat could have any existence with a British House of Peers. The‘evidence their Lordships had just heard, it was true, proved, thaft the paft of the petition. Which stated theprisoners were naked, and were suffered to remain with our needful clothing, was ill - founded; but then the House - mult admit, that, f forty the nature of things, the evidence wasmeceffarily partial, and the billy means at getting at salt, and equal testimpny lay, as far as he - knew, beyond the reach of their Lordships; - for, certainly, urtlefs Ftne of the subscribers - to the petition could be brought to the : bar, to be heard as to the reasons on which they grounded that part of the petition; ir could not ‘be said that the case was wholly before the House. He had lately been applied to From some persons in Holland, arid desired to take the charge of distributing fifteen hundred pounds, ( raised among certain gentlemen Of property in the United Provinces, ) among the Butch prisoners in this country; and upon application td tffe Commiiftoners of Sick and Hurt, in# order to get infor -, mation how he should proceed, they not only made him inafter of the proper means of disthbuting the money, but gave him every fort of assistance that could reasonably be desired.

The Dutch, his Grace said, had by some means or other, reports made to them. Which led them to imagine that their countrymen, who were prisoners in England, were treated with unkindnefs and inhumanity; on their appointing an agent to enquire into the foundation of the complaint, the Commissioxaers ^ of Sick and Hurt, gave the agent an opportunity of seeing the Dutch prisoners in all the most general places of confinement, and after a personai examination into the circumstances of thei r situation, the agent found that there was no cause for the complaint, and that the grievances alledged were totally groundlefs. Without therefore going into any d. ifti. n&ion with regard to the country of one prisoner, or, the country of another; without talking of the cause for which each made war; without denying that the Americans were rebels, or asserting, as he might poflibly be inclined to assert, that they took up arms justiftably, in defence of their liberties; it was enough for him to say that it was manifeft some prisoners of war had a larger allowance than others; and that jf the allowance made the French, Spaijifh and Dutch prisoners, was barely fufilcient to luftain •. ' them.

, 37 : 4 PARLIAMENTARY. A. 1781.

them, the - allowance, made the American priibncrsL ' was. not ^ enough; 7 and foyvvice verja ^ if the allowance made the latter was iufficient, the allowance, of the former was - Superabundant arid larger. than; it ought to be. His Grace proceeded, and laid, that it; ill became Great Britain to, treat those. pri - ioners with greater parfimony, and with lefs liberality in point of food, with Whofe coujrftry; vve wished for re - union and reconciliation, than ’. the of; FrancOi; a nation

which tome persons had $atcdj to; be otir natural, foe,, but which certainl ' y. - was. qur ' morolre ^ ucnt eneniyvthan America had proved lierfqlf. ? ~. cm .; ' " - ;

His Grace concluded with moving in < the usual form, praying that lV : s; iyia}efty would be pleased to give d > regions, that •the American prisoners fhquld. not be in a wo ^ fe, condition than thofc of France, Spain, andi HolIand. - rrThis was the fu bilance of the Add refs. :

S ^ rd Lor & Saxckdlcb laid, after the evidence which their Lord -

SerJv > l : e. ships had just heard, he trusted the House would not think it either necessary or expedient to agree to the noble Duke’s motion. It had been proved at. W 6ar, that the, American pri - loners were in good health, that they had a sufficient quantity of provisions, and that they wefe comfortably clad at the expence of this country. He appealed to their Lordships, whether, if men accustomed to hard labour in the open air, were healthy and content with a small portion of food, the present allowance to the American prisoners, who were in a state of inactivity and confinement, was not at leaft as much as could be reasonably expected

Lord Abingdon and Lord Coventry spoke shortly to the question, but offered nothing new on the subjech. L ' - ' d I ' or < ^ Loughborough said, he had paid a good deal of at ten 7 tsrsG; ri ' tion to the subje£t,. from the firffc moment it had been started in the House by the noble Duke’s notice. He had attended likewise to the arguments, that had been held, and the evL dence that had been adduced upon it, in another place, and he was perfectly astonished to find, that after all ^ the foie cause of complaint was, that half a pound of bread was allowed to the French prisoners daily more than was allowed the Americans. Enquiries of the kind with the presentj he held to be highly laudable, and such as reflected great honour on those who set them on foot. The treatment of all per - fons, whom the fitiiation of Great Britain and the fortune I cf vrar had put in our power, and whom the neceffity of affairs obliged us to hold in restraint, was undoubtedly a subject, which concerned us, as a nation, to look to, and to

A. 17&I ., D E. B A T : E S. ? 3 : 75

fee that it wjfs not rendered more hard nor, more Ccvare than ' - was confident with true policy, with humanity, and with that waited degree of liberality and tcndernefs, which had, - during the last war, and which, he trusted, wpuld, during every. war, distinguish. this country, and place it above ail ' others. But he could. not help repeating his astonishment, to find, after the present enquiry. had been lifted to th ? botom, { that the difference of half a pouud of bread, per day, fhoujti, remain the only ground of complaint. A boojc, published ' by

Mr.. Howard, setting forth the state of all the, pri Tons in England at the time he. viewed them; among othqr pidfons, notice was taken of Mill - Prifori, at Plymouth ^ of Forton Prisonj at Portsmouth, and of the established proportion of, bread, and every other species of provisions allowed to the different prisoners of war in each. The distindtion now, dwelt upon, as the subject of the Add refs just nTov, ed, was expressly stated by Mr. Howard, but without any remark, the fmaileft objection ^ pr the leaft imputation of censure.

■ In France, it being usual to consume a much greater proportion of bread than was the custom in this country the Government had wifely allotted a pouud and a half of bread to every prisoner in every jail throughout the kingdom. It was therefore necessary for us to adopt the fame rule with re - j gard to the French prisoners, and to feed them in proportion 1 to their habits of taking food in their own country. With I an American the case Was - different. An American, like an Englishmen, w as accustomed to eat more animal food than bread, and therefore in apportioning his allowance, thatcir - cumftance deserved attention. Befides, a pound of bread was the ordinary jp. il allowance throughout this kingdom. Even by the act, which from its having originated in that House, was generally called the Lord’s Act, it was ordained, those persons, whose cases nioft loudly called for compaftion, viz. persons, who having surrendered their all, were still detained

I in prison, should be allowed a groat a day -; which purchased just that proportion of bread and beef, &c that Dr. Far - quharfon had stated to have been purchased with the fame sum, for the rebel prisoners in 1745. His Lordship concluded With declaring himself against the moiiom The Duke of Richmondfaid, he had expedited to have heardDu ^ e ifome better - arguments against his motion ’ ' from a noble I Lord, who had; raised himself by - his fuperidr; abilities toHhe I elevated and ? distinguished station which he ' then filled. The I noble. Lord, : he observed, had made it his ' first objection,

Ijthat ' the present was an old storv. - arid that - the difference of H the

F A R L A ME NT A RY A. 1761 *

thts - allowance ' to ? the ’ French ^ Spanish, and - Dutch prisoners, and the allowance ' made to the American ’ priToners, - was - mentioned ' by Mr; Howard, and was tb be - fourtdcorre£tly related in hisvbook onr the flatopf ouf prisons. This war, his Grace laid exactly likewhat every house - keeper daily ex - peri erfced; whenever he ' found any thing broke in his hbufe,. his ii - rvants always - answered, ce Oh, fir, it~ has been broken a long time; ’ ' He appealed to the House, whether the long - ekifience of an evil proved that it was lefs an evil; and con - tended, that in the p re Tent case, it did not diminish the extent and size of the mischief, that it ' turned out to have been a mischief of long", duration. With regard to the allotment, of a pound of bread to prisoners, in alt the jails of the ' jdng - dom, the noble Lord : in the black gown had miftated ' a fact accidentally; he. took > t for granted. The faftin that respect was Other wife. To his knowledge, the jail allowance in Sussex, the county in which he lived, was two pounds of bread a day; the original allowance had been only one pound; but on a late presentment, that a pound was not sufficient for the sustenance of the prisoners,. the allowance had been doubled. He believed, also, that more than a - pound of bread each day was allotted to the prisoners in mofi of the county jails in the kingdom. In Holland, whatever might be the case in France, and Spain, he was pretty sure, the very contrary rule of feeding was. " in ufe, and ' that bread made the leaft portion of a Dutchman’s meal. He meant no national refie£tion ih what he was ’ going to say, but he could norhelp observing, that Doctor Farquharson and - the noble Lord in the black gown, came from a. country, the habits of eating in which, in hisrnjnd, rendered, them, the last men to whose measurement of what was a - fit portion of : food for. an Englifhman he should be wiUingtosubscribe.. In Scotland It was notorious, the - natives w ' ereac. customed to Ivvallow but little solid meat, and that they could support nature; with considerable lefs food than; would suffice for an Englifhman. He could not therefore suffer himself to he swayed by arguments proceeding, from persons -, who, however able : they might be in other respefls, did not appear to him. to be corn - petept - judges of the case in - questioiv. An American was in his miud an Englifliman jlie knew no dist. in£fciom; and bath ought to be. fed alike. Their Lordships ought to be aware that an Englishmen could not. live; on oatmeal !; : and if an EbglifEm. au could, not, an American ought not to be, expelled tprdp fod Bat; after - U > V the constant question; would : oc -

carp

A. i ^ i. DEBATES.. 377

cur, ought an American prisoner to fare worfc in this country than a French, Spanish, or Dutch prisoner ? That question there was no getting over. The noble. Lord had not said a word in answer to it,. His Grace said, he knew it w custom for great speakers to pass by that part of an ' argument which pinched most, and poflibly it was to that, that he wa ? to aferibe the noble Loids having, never met the question, which he had just stated, and which he defied any other Lord had sent to answer.

Lord Loughborough said, he should be unworthy the atten - L - tion heir Lordships had shewn him, and should have noborou£b ' right to claim their notice on any future occasion, were he to suffer what had been said, in reply to his argument, to pass without an, answer. The noble Duke had first. charged him with having miftated a fact, and had defended his accusation by an argument of rather a singular nature. In oi der. to prove that a pound of bread was not the Ufual jail allowance throughout the kingdom, his Grace had been pieased to state, that owing to a late presentment in the county of Sussex, the usual jail allowance in Sussex had had been doubled, and two pounds of bread allowed to eachqjrifbhcr daily, instead of one pound; so that the noble Duke had admitted, that one pound had been the usual allowance in Sussex, in the very moment that he meant to establish the fact, that one pound was not the general allowance throughout the kingom. In order to convince their Lordships that he had not miftated a sass, he would repeat what he had said. His Lordship then minutely recapitulated that part of his; argument, and aftewards said, that in Yorkshire, a. county neither remarkable for its excess

of liberality, nor noted for being a county inclined to star - » - ving, the jail allowance Was something short of a pound of bread a daythis he knew, and he had a right to say he knew it, because the sheriff had lately reported to him as a judge that in York Castle, the prisoners allowance was as much short of one pound of bread each day as the difference in point of weight after it was baked amounted to His Lordship said it was a little unfortunate for po£tor Farquharson, that he had been examined; the moment, however, that it became necessary to answer what he had offered in his first speeeli, the tables were turned, and pobr Doftor Farquharson became the subject of ridicule as well as himself. With regard to what had been said about Scotland, the mcide of diet there, oatmeal and the like, inferior as he was ready to confess hirm self to the noble Duke in every other respect, he could not

Ccc but

37 » PARLIAMENTARY A. 1, 781.

but feci, that by condcfcending to ufe such arguments, the noble Duke had rendered him so much his Superior, and raised him so high above him, that he would disdain to make any reply.

Duke of The Duke of Richmond rofe again, and declared, he meant Ricl - Msnd. ^ either to throw out a national reflection, nor to say any tiling personal, in what he had fuggcftecl respecting the manner of living in Scotland. He intended solely to state a fast, which he conceived he had a right to make advantage of in his argument. It - was true, that Scotchmen were ac - customecl to a more lpare diet than Englishmen; and let the, noble Lord consider it, in What light he chose, he should perfift in stating it to be his opinion, that at man used from his infancy to a more moderate portion of food, 1 than a man otherwise brought up, was not a fit judge of what ought to be a ration of provisions allotted ' to the latter. At the fame time he did affin e the noble Lord, he was as much above narrow prejudices, and as great an enemy to national dif - tinClions, as lie could he. He wiflied all mankind to live in a state of amity, and to consider each other as. brethren; but j in fair argument, he had ever conceived he was warranted in stating his sentiments, as they really occurred, and whether the noble Lord chose to treat them with disdain or not, he should continue to Hate tfiem freely, and without reserve. His Grace once more challenged the House to surmount the difficulty of maintaining that it was either politic or just to make an humane distinctton in the allowance of provisions to prisoners of war.

Lord jibingdon aiked, what right we had to make the Americans prisoners in theftrft instance, and called upon the noble Lords in office to prove that any such right existed ? |, ord Khg. Lord King argued on the inhumanity of treating those who had been our fe 1 low - subjects worfc than other prisoners of - war, and contended, that however it might be supported in argument, that the French prisoners were intifled to dil -. tin£t : on, it never could be maintained, that any distin&ion ought to be made between Dutch prisoners and American priioners.

At length the tpieftion was put, and the House divided. Contents 14, proxies 1 Not contents 47, proxies 19,

July 3 ?

The order of the day for going into a committee on Phi lip’s powder bill being read, Lord Sandys took the chair, several wipneffies were examined,

M ?

A. 1781. "DEBATE S. 379

• Mr. Grim wood, a gardener, was examined, who said, To far as his experiments had gone the powder answered extremely well, '

Captain Lifle and two other - Avitneffcs were next called, whose testimony seemed rather favourable.

Earl Bathurst animadverted very fully on the evidence de - Earl Ba - livered at the bar, arid said, the efficacy of tjhe powder hadn ' t/ ? *

Been so fully and satisfactorily proved, that he hoped the bill would meet with no farther interruption till passed into a law.,

The Earl of Sandwich was equally warm and sanguine in hiSEarlof expectations. He trusted no more time would be spent in Sandwich seeking other proofs, where none were wanting. It was true cavils might be raised, ad infinitum, but from the well known disposition of their Lordships nothing like that could be apprehended in such an assembly. Proofs had been fought i proofs had been given; and proofs had been received; after which he thought it extremely unnecessary to trouble the House with a {ingle word more in support of a case so fully and completely made out.

Lord Walfingham said, he had at one time conceived as great Lord WaU a prediledion for the powder as the noble Earl who fpoke/w£i < WJ » last. When the matter was first started, the consideration of it was referred to the Board of Trader where at the time he had the honour to have a feat. As far as the subject came properly before the Board, he mull confess he was inclined to think favourably of it, and was led to believe it would answer the end proposed; but upon a closer invelligation, and having lince then received new lights on the subject, he had found strong reasons for altering his opinion; and though he did it with great diffidence, he was sorry to totally differ from the two noble Earls, who had already Ipoke; for, so far from the evidence being full and complete, he conceived it to be the very reverfe, and to be every way imperfeft un - satisfactor. y, and incomplete. Such, therefore, being, in his opinion, the real ffate of the case, he wished that government would reward Mr. Philips upon farther proofs, or that, trolling to the efficacy of his powders, he might obtain a patent to reimburse him for his loss of time and trouble.

Earl Ferrers condemned the principle of the bill, in theFa first inllance, and totally disapproved of the objects it had inr; rfi : contemplation. He thought, at a season like the present, that the public money ought not to be so applied; and, be -

Ccc a He

3 ^ 0 PARLIAMENTARY, A. 178 *

fore he entered into a consideration of the nature of the powder, the benefits which were to be derived from it9 or the proofs in which its prefumed efficacy was made to rest, he had set his face against the bill merely on account of the principle.

He allured their Lordships, that he had not acted entirely an idle part, for understanding ' it. was a favourite purpose to be carried by I ords of great weight and respectibility in that House, he had called that very morningat an eminent gardener’s in Brompton, whom he had been informed made a trial of Mr. PhiUp ? s powder. He found him at home, and asked him how far the powder had succeeded in destroying ants, caterpillars, and other, vermin, which are apt to in felt gardens, and prove so extremely injurious to the interest of the cultivator ? The gardener, in cqnfequence. of those questions -, pointed out to him an apricot - tree, with itfc leaves withered and dropped, which tree he had. dressed with the powder, agreeably to the directions which accompanied it.

The gardener, so far from thinking favourably, or even j doubtfully of the powder, his Lordship said, was clearly of opinion that it was of a poifonous quality; and allured him, lie would not eat the fruit which grew upon those trees which had been sprinkled "with the powder on any confederation whatever. ~ '

If, where the procefs was so much more removed from the public danger arising from the noxious qualities of the powder, and the gardener hadexprelfed such strong apprehensions, he thought it behoved their Lordships to be much more cir - cumfpect and ' careful where the powder was to be immediate - ! ly mixed with the food of the men fervi ' og aboard his Ma - jesty’s ships of war. In ship - provisions, the mischief might be so extended, as to affect the health of many thoufands, before, airy means of putting; a flop to it could bedeviled; he therefore feriously exhorted their Lordships, to take care what farther steps they took in a business obviously attended with such infinite hazard and peri}.

Marquis of The Marquis of Rockingham coincided strongly in opinion Rockingham with the noble Earl who spoke 1 aft. - —He thought, the evidence given at the bar might have been well {pared - as it amounted to just nothing. If something more satisfactory did not still remain behind, he should not hefitatq to say, that it it was impossible their Lordships, upon such proofs, could ever pass the bill.. The fession ' Was just drawing to a. period, the proofs as he observedjbefore, were yet wanting ^

unde ’

' " '

A. 1 81 -.. DEBATES.

under such circumstances therefore, if Mr. Phillip s ws to be rewarded; at all events he few no other - mode of doing it, but by granting that gentleman, a patent; from whence, within a very few years, he must derive a most ample fortune, if his powder answered the, expectation he ' and his friends had aheady formed of it. '

The Lord Chancellor feid, he was ' not yet in the leaft per - Lord fuaded, that the efficacy of the powder had been proved inLeUori any one instance. He said, he had received a letter from a Mr. Shields, an eminent nurfery - man and gardener, the preceding evening, Hating, that he had made various experiments with the powder, but it by no means answered. His Lordship hoped before the House consented to give away so large a sum of the public money, and as yet for seemingly an interested purpose, ail the evidence which could be procured, either - for or against, ought to be heard. In order therefore, that Mr. Shields might be examined, his Lord - t ffiip moved, that the chairman leave the chair, and report progrefs. -

Earl Batburjl opposed the motion very Warmly, and feid, E ’ rI he was surprised to hear the noble and learned Lord whotbar ^ spoke last, represent the bill as an object of private interest, merely calculated to serve an individual;. when it was ma - nifeft, that the bill was in every possible ferffe of the word, a public one, and had been taken up upon, the most clear, open, and unquestionable ground of public utility; no left an objeCI, than that of preserving the health of our feameti against the bad effects which had been so often, so fatally felt aboard his Majesty’s ships of war, where those vermin called weevils and cock - roaches, had, by mixing with the ships provisions, rendered them destru&ive to - the health of the teamen.

As for poftponing the bill to a future day, merely to hunt out evidence to defeat it, he believed it was a thing totally unusual. It had already been before the House for. feveraj 1 day s, and the not calling or preparing evidence to meet that given at the bar, was in hk apprehension, giving the point up, unless the noble and learned; Lord would come forward and fey, that he. would produce the testiraony of other wit - nelfes, which would be sufficient to overturn every thing hitherto advanced in favour of the bill.

Lord Dudley said, he felt himself hurt at fomethihg that Eor < 1 had fallen v from the noble and learned Lord; as if those noble Lords who. had approved of and supported the bill,. acted from private or interested motives. All he could lay

in

381

Chax -

B < 2 -

Dud -

Lord Chancellor.

PARLIAMENTARY A. if8r.

in answer and in justice to himself, he could not in his opi -. nion say lefs, was, that whatever question came before him, in his legislative capacity, he considered and determined upon it as a free and independent Peer of Parliament. He never was an advocate for any man, or any bill, as the noble and learned Lord had suggested, but. in every question which came before him, determined agreeably to his confcierice, and as far as he was able to judge, for the good of his country.

. ' The Lord Chancellor observed, ' that the noble Lord who spoke last, had so exactly described him, that it w - as impof - lible for him to pass by unnoticed what had fallen from his Lordship. He wished flneerely the noble Lord had attended more carefully to what he said when last up; if he had, he was perfuaded he would have been saved the trouble of the present explanation. His Lordship denied that he had by infinuatibn, inuendo, or direbl expression, asserted any thing so scandalous against any one of their Lordships. It would have been a grofs reflection upon them as members of that House; it would have been a grofs violation of the established rules of debate; and it would, were he capable of uttering the like, be a daring and unprovoked infult put upon the whole body of the peerage. Such an idea was abhorrent to his nature, and as the charge bore such a ^ complexion, he thought any noble Lord, who in the hurry of debate might feel himself hurt, should be extremely cautious, in charging another noble Lord with what must stick so fast, if it should flick at all.

His Lordship gave the substance of the letter he received from Shields, said he understood Mr. Phillips’s powder had raised a dust in both Houses, but after ' repeated trials, the powder had failed. He read the material circumstances as they flood - in the letter, which in every instance, as far as the experiments were made, proved the ineflicacy of the powder.

The question was then put; Contents, 15; - non - contents, 15. “

The Earl of Sandwich seeing the numbers were equal, agreed that that the Lord Chancellor’s motion, and the farther consideration of the bill, should be deferred till Tuesday next.

July 4.

Public bufjnefs in course. No - Debate.

• - ' J“‘Jl

— ‘ k

1781. D E BAT E S.

■ Jl < b 5 *

As soon as the commissioners were robed, a meffage was lent to the Commons, desiring their attendance while his Majesty’s comm iflion, was reading, authorizing any three or more Peers to notify the royal assent to such bills as were then ready. Accordingly, when the Speaker and House came to the bar, the royal assent was notified to the Vote of Credit, Sinking Fond, Cocoa Nut, Almanac, Exchequer Ballances, Hemp and Flax, Longitude, and to about ten other public and private bills.

The order of the day for going into a committee on a; hill to amend and explain an act of the 17th of his present Majesty, to promote the residence of the parochial clergy, was read, and Lord Walfingham took the chair. Several amendments were proposed and adopted, and the bill ordered to be reported. t

As soon as the House was resumed, the Earl of Abingdon rofe, and gave notice, that he should move, on Tuesday next, for the second reading of the Bill for repealing certain clauses in the Marriage Act, and thought ' it necessary, that their lordships should be summoned for that day.

TheLord Chancellor leaving the woolfack, said, that the Lord Chax - motion was, in his mind, extremely improper, for it wo\ildce/ ^ r be premature to bring on the consideration of lb important a bill at present, when several Lords, not ex efling it, were of course unprepared to speak upon it : as for his own parr, if all their Lordships had already weighed the matter as much in their minds as‘he happened to have done in his, he would not feel the lea ' ft difficulty in moving to put off the second reading of the bill for three months : but as it was possible that their Lordships might not have, as yet, turned their thoughts, to it, so he would not deprive them by a hafty motion, of an opportunity of speakin. g to the merits of the bill. For his part, he did not intend to enter into the the - rits; it was sufficient for him that so very important a quef - tion ought not to be agitated in the middle of July -. Many of their Lordships might recoiled the abuses that existed before the Marriage Act was. introduced : they were so firiking, that the House of Peers had directed the judges to bring in a bill to remedy them; the bill was brought in, but as it happened not to pro ^ e unexceptionable to the House, it did not pass. In the next fession of parliament, another bill to correct the lamp abuses. was brought in, and underwent

3&4

PARLIAMENTARY A. 17 1

the rnoft fotemn cliiculfion in both Houses, before it paffe. l into a law : that law had now existed twenty - eight years; and the nation was familiarised to its formstheir Lord - ships would therefore be backward to make any alterations in it, until it should have been proved that fudi alterations I were ncecffavy. He by no means contended that the law vvas proper in every respect; or that some provisions in the bill to amend it might not be very defircable; but his great objection to the bill was, that there was not, at present, time to enter into as ample a difeuflioh of the subject as it re quired; and therefore he was ready to confcfs, that on that ground he would oppofe the bill on Tuesday next. He entertained a great deal of vefpeCf for the honourable gentleman who was the author of the bill; but he could not carry his respe& so far as to let a bill of such importance pass at ib late a period of the fcllion, without doing every thing in his power to prevent it. l ord Lord dbingdon replied, that it was his opinion that the bill

"• ought to pass this fession \ and lie trusted that he Jfhould be able to lay such fads before their Lordships as would afford the most irrefiftible arguments in favour of tin ? bill. But as he knew he vvas not equal to a contest with the noble and learned Lord who spoke last, he would commit his thoughts to paper, and read them to the House on Tuesday.

The motion was then put and carried; and it was ordered that the Lords be summoned to attend the second reading on. that day.

3 > rd mvf - Lord HiJlJborougl having moved the order of the day, for. - twgb. the second reading of the East India Bill, the Duke of Chandois rofe and laid, well aware as he Was, oft the delicacy of the ground he was about to take, and of the objections generally made ag; ainst any noble Lord’s oppoling a Bill of Supply, he could not conlcientiobfly avoid rifing to dppoft the bill, for the second reading of Which, the noble Earl had just moved their Lordships. At the lame time he trusted, that the House vvould not impute his doing so to any peevifh inclination to object to every bill that came before them, or to any wish to embarrass Government, by endeavouring to prevent a bill’s passing, which would put a large sum of money immediately into their power. He knew perfectly well, that such was the exigency of affairs, that it was the duty of Parliament to strengthen the King’s hands as much as. poilible, to enable him, if not to subdue his numerous arid

powerful )

4

A. 178L

ftE B A t E S.

38s

powerful cflemicB, as leaft to carry on the war in such a manner as lliould ensure ns a speedy and an honourable pence. He knew also that the hands of government could not he lb well strengthened by any other means as by chear - f ' ully granting lar£je, though nccelTary suppliqs, in order to enable the executive branch of the legislature to make the most vigorous and effectua ! efforts, the better to give fucccfs to the operations of the present expenlive and wide extended war. If, however, the national resources were exhausted, and Great Britain mull fink, he could not hut anxioufty wish, that file might link with honour, and not in the moment of her decline disgrace herlelf ’ by acts that carried with them indelible marks of ignominy and infamy. The present bill, he mult contend, was not a bill of supply; it was a bill of robbery and rapine : It took that by force, the claim to which, at any rate, was neither made out nor admitted; He was far from meaning to deny, that the public had a right to a participation in the profits of the Laft India Company. He knew they had such a right; but then the extent of it ought to be established to the satisfaefcion and conviction of both parties before any participation was made. At a period of the feliiion like the present when the greatest part of the noble Lords who made up that House, fatigued with the labour and long continuance of the session, had left town, and could not give their attendance, a bill of lb much consequence as the bill then under consideration, ought not to be brought before their Lordships; and the more especially at the time which had been chosen for introducing the bill into the other House; viz. just after the company had received the severest blow that had ever been struck against them in India; the effect of which blow and its consequences they neither knew, nor could foretel at the time, nor indeed at this moment.

Haying dwelt for some Ihort time on arguments ftmilar to the above, his Grace went into a long and diffblive difeuffed of the conduct of adrriinistration, the expenditure of the public money the want, of system vilible in the conduct of Ministers, and other topics that have come under frequent consideration in the courle of the session.

His Grace after ted, that either administration had formed no. system of government, or if there was any system formed, it was of so. singular and secret a nature, that it was known, but to one individual in office, and either dared not face che light, or was incapable of being brought forward; He com -

Ddd

S§6. PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

plained of the lavifli expenditure of the public money, in daily jobs calculated to serve the creatures of adminifttation, and laid the contractors, on whom the public money was profulcly bestowed, were the weevils of, ©ur rcfources. He wifired for a power flitl more efficacious than that of Mr, Philips, to destroy th. ofe noxious vermin, which occasioned such violent blasts to the finances of the kingdom ., He concluded, with declaring, that he should oppole the second reading of the bill.

Lof The Earl of Hillfbormgh said, as he had moved the second h ifearcugb reaciing of t 1 (. bill, he would trouble their Lordships with a very few words in answer to what they had just heard from the noble Duke.

. The noble ' Duke, in the speech which he had been pleased j to make that day, had, in his opinion, spoken a long time to a great variety of topics, which had no relation whatever to the bill in question, but to the bill itfclf he had said very little indeed. With regard to that part of the noble Duke’s speech which did refer to the bill, the noble Duke must ex - cufe him, if he declared he thought it had been prepared for a bill very different from that under oonsideration. It appeared to him, to apply rather to a compuMiye bill which had been talked of in the world, than to the bill actually before their Lordships. So far from the present bill being,. as the noble Duke had declared it to be, a bill of robbery and rapine, the bill. was directly and diametrically the reverfe; nor could he hetter answer the noble Duke, nor prove the aftertion he had just made, more strongly, than by reading to their Lordships a short extract from the bill itfelf.

His Lordship then read, that part of the preamble which sets forth, that on the 2 6th day of June last, a petition from the General Court of Proprietors of East India - Stock, had been presented to the House of Commons ^ in which the General Court declared themselves ' desirous of renewing their charter on certain conditions and regulations thereafter stipulated, and which conditions and regulutions made up the several clauses of the bill. His Lordship having read the whole of the necessary extract, observed, it was thence evident, that the bill was not what the noble Duke had repre - fented ft to be, a bill of robbery and raping; but - that on the contrary, it was a bill tending to authorize and sanction an agreement mutually and cordially settled between ( the parties. ! With regard to the other topics on which the noble Duke had expatiated, he said, they were f© thread - bare, and the

arguments,

A. if 8i, D E, B A T E S.

arguments, such as they were, which the noble Duke had condcfcencled to ufc, had been refuted so often, ( having been contradi&cd and disproved again and again ) "that he would not trouble their Lordships any farther; the noble Duke therefore, muffc excuse his passing them over in silence. His Lordship moved, that the bill be read a second time; which motion was carried without a division.

July 6.

The order of the day for the second reading of the bill for indemnifying the Governor - General and Council of Bengal, for all aas done contrary, or in disobedience to the orders, proceedings, and determinations of the Supreme Courts of Justice in that province, being moved.

Lord Abingdon role to oppofc it, and said, Ci My Lords, I rife to move to your Lordships, that the consideration of this ^ bill be put off to this day two months; I do so, my Lords, merely from what, 1 fee in the title page of it, and without entering at all into all the laboured intricacy and Teeming un~ digested chaos of its contents; contents, my Lords, that to digest, would bring your Lordships to the hour of another fession of parliament without finishing this. The part of the title page alluded to, is this : 6 And also for indemnifying the Governor - General and Council of Bengal, and all officers who have acted under their orders or authority, in the refinance made to the procefs of the Supreme Court. ’ My Lords, was there ever such a title page to a bill before t all the volumes of your statute books, undigested and voluminous as they are, will not give you such an example. An adtof parliament paftes appointing a Supreme Court of Judicature in India. Now an act of parliament pafles to indemnify resistance to that Court. My Lords, there are cases ' where resistance is the law of the land. The case of America is. such a case. But those cases want no indemnification. This case, however, it Teems does, and therefore, my Lords, we must have time to consider it. My Lords, I move your Lordships, that the consideration of this bill be deferred to this day two months.

The Earl of Radnor seconded the motion on the grounds o£e the arbitrary and despotic powers with which it armed the - " Governor and Supreme Council of Bengal. The conduct of the officers of the Eafi : India Company in their settlements had been for many years the disgrace of the empire as well as its bane. They had, by acts of unparallelled of -

X ) d d 2 prdffioiu

S88

PAR LI

A M E N ' T

ARY

A. 1781,

"preflion, accumulated fortunes of a princely nature by acts which degraded them from the rank ' and character - of men, and which brought deserved obloquy on the nation to which they belonged. To check these ’ inhuman praftibes, the aft he complained of had passed; if it was true, as, he believed in some instances it waSj that the Supreme Court had gone to lengths by which they were unwarranted by the charter of their establishment, it was certainly in the power of Parliament to make regulations for their good government, without doing that violence to the constitution which in his opinion the present bill was calculated to effectiiate. He should always consider the laws of this country as the best fitted the legislature to dispense, and the subjects of Britain in, all her extended territories to enjoy. He did not think it either wife or justifiable in Parliament to pals this hafty law on the evidence of one of the parties interested in the establishment of this form of governnient. They ought to hear the parties accused in their own justification; they ought to deliberate with great caution on the business, and not in the conclusion of a iiioft tedious session pass it into a law without much attention, or any just knowledge of the fafts ' and nature of the question. Their Lordships ought to refieft, that this aft was to influence the lives, the happinefs, and the fortunes of a number of people, so great a number that we could hardh ' form in our minds an idea of the ope7 ration of this aft. What numbers rauft it not involve in slavery; what numbers must it not deliver into the hands of the Governor and Council; into the hands of those mep who have been, as he said, those who had already brought disgrace on their country ‘ and on human nature by their ' rapacity and their violence ! The check upon them was exceedingly inadequate, and ought undoubtedly to be rendered more equal to the importance of the trust.

. Lord Stormont rofe to defend the bill. He said, that the i~rmsnt. pr‘incipie cf the laws of England was so opppfite to the law§, cuyoms, and religion of the inhabitants of the East Indies, that it would be niadnefs to introduce our laws among them. What man inhisfenfes would think of binding Mahometans. and Gentoos by laws that were made for the government of ’ Christians ? The British laws were excellent no doubt ;

and ho one could venerate them mqre than He did; but it was jbecause he felt them to be excellent that he would not intro - : duce them in India : for why were; they found excellent in England ? It was because they were congenial with our con - ' *. ... ftitution ?

A. 1781. DEBATES, 389

flitution, ’ habits, customs, prejudices and religion; and that, was the re ' afpn why they niuft be disagreeable to Gentoos and IVlahometans; for as they militated strongly against their laws, habits and religion, they must deem it tyranny to be governed by them. The Tartar, the lavage conqueror of China, was prudent enough not to impofe his laws upon that empire, but fufFered it to be ruled by those laws to which the Chinefe had been long, familiarized. We were conquerors, and hard ones too; for we shewed ourselves more imprudent, more rafh, and more cruel, than those Tartars whom we might please to call Barbarians. He meant not to throw the jeaft blame upon the Judges of the Supreme Court of Judicature; on the contrary, he was willing to admit that they - had a£ted with the rnoft upright intention; but Hill he must say, that they extended their jurisdiction so far that the Governor and Council had been at last obliged to oppofe their orders, to preserve those settlements which were allowed on all hands to be precious to this country. However, though they had undoubtedly acted for the belt, yet as they had acted against law, it was fit that they should be indemnified for their intentions; and it was also necessary they should be armed with such powers, as should enable them to preserve the tranquility of the settlements : and though it, was intended that they should have a certain portion of arbitrary power, still care had been taken to make such provisions in the bill as should make them careful not to abuse it; and this was by1 making them responfibie to the Courts of this. country for their conduct. From all these considerations, he hoped their Lordships would not concur with the noble Lord, who had moved to put off the bill.

Lord Abingdon rofe again, and added some more observa - Abing - tions against the bill; he talked of certain matters contained ^, in it being of the fort which would justify impeachments, and declared he meant to make them the ground - work of impeachment of his Majesty’s ministers, when the season should be ripe for it.

The Lord Chancellor said, the noble Earl who spoke first, £or ^ arid the noble Earl who spoke feconcl, had made an imprtt - Chancellor. lion on his nfind, and taught him that much might be advanced of a very serious nature, ^ both for and against the bill. The objection first started by the noble Earl, who opened the debate, carried great weight with it, and several of the objections taken by the other noble Earl were also entitled to attention. He made no scruple to say, that he 2 ’ ' for

39&

PARLIAMENTARY A.. 1781.

for one should be ready to contend for putting off the bill till another fefSons, when it could be discussed more feriously and more amply, were it not, as the noble Viscount in the green ribbon had observed, absolutely necessary that, the evil, flawed to have occasioned the bill, should have an immediate parliamentary curse ;

There was at : this time a civil war, as it were, carrying dflin India, between the Supreme Court of Judicature and the Governor - General and Council. Such a warfare could hot but involve in it all our Indian concerns, and produce consequences that inuffc neceflarily be extremely mischievous. ' The urgency therefore of the case, called upon parliament to apply a temporary remedy, for he acknowledged the present was no better. He lamented, that a bill of such real importance had not been brought in earlier in the fession. With regard to several of the objections that had been stated, many of them ( he spoke it with great fubmifhon to the noble Earl from whom they came ) appeared to him to be rather 6bjcCtions that ' went to the parts and clauses of the bill, than objections that applied immediately to the principle. He Would therefore hope, that every noble Lord, as well as those who had spoken against the bill, as the noble Viscount, Who had so ably and so clearly shewn the great neceflity for the House agreeing to pals it, would ^ content that it should go to a Committee, and when it Was before the Hdufe in that Stage, and under investigation, clause by clause, he did not despair of rendering the whole unobjectionable, - by a few Short amendments. He said, farther, that he agreed with the noble Earl in the validity of his objection, when he had Stated that a delpotic power ought not to be lodged, if pof - iible, any where; but if it was at any time requifitej it ought to he as guardedly delegated as poflible, and the conduct arising frpin - it to be rendered subject to revision and examination, of One kind or other,. somewhere.. A govern - j ment having, in its principle, arbitrary power, was undoubtedly obnoxious to the uiiderstanding arid feelings of every Englishmen; but then it ought to be remembered, 1 that where a government of that nature was to be exercised, iii consequence of the present bill, the persons subject to it were no Strangers to arbitrary power; they had lived from their cradles in the habits of accommodating their conduCt to despotic sway, and they would feel it as no hardship whatever .; His Lordship went through every clause cursorily, Stating the most prefling objections. and shewing what

• fgri

, D E B A T, ' E "S 3 ^

fort of amendments might do them away. In regard, to, the arbitrary power, he thought execution in cases of life, and sentence in other cases, might be. staid, upon a regular application, and wait till an appeal was decided on here in England. He concluded with. prefling their Lordships - to iu. fibr the bill to go to a Committee.

Lord jRadnor role again, and gave his consent to the noble Ld. Rais *. Lord s requisition : he then entered into the difcuflipn of the clauie,. veiling an arbitrary, power in the -. Governor and Council; and said, whenever he. found it - unavoidably necefr fary to veil an arbitrary power any where, he Should choole to veil it in one person, and not in a. number. Their Lord *

Ships might fee, - by an examination of, the ^ records of the Governor and Council, that what was done at one time by a finall majority was contradi£led and undone afterwards by three or four others. His LordShip added, that he thought it was wifer and safer to lodge absolute power in the breast ' of one man, and to make that man reiponfible, and if he Should deserve it, punishable for his conduct.

The Lord Chancellor made ( a Short reply.

Lord Abingdon also Spoke a third time, and iaid arbitrary W Mtsg jpower was incompatible with our constitution. Great Bri - d ( tn ' tain was - a - free Slate, and it was a folefcism in term for a free Hate to grant an arbitrary power. The one and the other could not exist together.

On the question being put, the bill was read a Second time, and committed for Monday.

A Short conversation passed after the second reading, relative to the choice of a day for the commitment of the bill.

Lord Abingdon wished to have all the papers before the HouSe, on which the House of Commons had paised the bill.. The Lord Chancellor Shewed,. that it was impossible to say, whether thpfe, papers were necessary or not, till the bUj - was before the House in a Committee.

'; ' ' J it 9 ., / ., 4 .;. ■

As soon as prayers were over, witnesses were examined, and Counfel called, to the bar on the bill, for warehousing Sugars. _ _ -

. The Counfei being. withdrawn, Lord Grantham rpfe, LordGrin and observed,. th, at by what appeared in evidence, and argu -. /i ®. men t at the fear, there, arose Several questions which required much serious. deliberation, much more than it was poSfible it could receive stffoiatea period of the feibon $ he therefore

moved

39 *

P A H £ I A M E M T A ft Y.

A. ijBit

moved that said biJl be taken into farther cbhfidefktion ori that day month, which motion was unanimously agreed to.

The second order of the day was then read for the House to go into a committee on the Bengal Judicature bill, Lord Sandys accordingly took the chair of the committee,

. The Lord Chancellor then rofe, ahd made several pointed observations on tbeneceffity of a bill such as the present, in principle, but different in the provisions; fottie of which hd said, and endeavoured to prove, had partly v a doubtful j and partly a dangerous tendency. - •, '

Lord ] \4ansfield endeavoured to obviate the material objections, and to reconcile the present bill with that passed the 13th of his present Majesty, in point of ultimate jurisdiction.

The Lord Chancellor replied, and seemed to appeal to Lord Loughborough, ( they were both at the time the law, officers of the Crown ) whether the objections he had taken were not well founded.

Lord Loughborough wished to perufe and compare both bills, or the present bill with the existing. law.

. Lord Jbfansjieldy in a short speech, made farther observations on the bill. s -

At length, by a kind of compromise, the Lord Chancellor moved, that the chairman do leave the chair, and report progress.

Lord Loughborough ' said one day could make no difference. The other orders of the day were poftponed, and the House adjourned at half after fix o ’ clock to tf » e next day.

July 10.

The order of the day to go into a committee, upon Phi - T. it\o ( Sand~ 1 ips’s Powder bill being read, the Earl of Sandwich rofe and wich bbferved, that so many reports had gone forth relative to the inefficacy of Mr. Philips’s powder, and so many differences bad arisen among their Lordships on the subject, that the bill though sufficiently important to claim their Lordships warmeft attention, was not of importance enough in his mind, to take up so much of their Lordships time at so ad - v vanced a period of the fession. He should therefore, when every moment of their Lordship’s time became so precious, content himself with an Address to his Majesty, that the re - : fult of the several experiments which have or shall be made aboard his Majesty’s ships of war be laid before that House; at the opening of the next fession of Parliament. :; -

■ His

LorA. Chancellor.

Earl Man/, field.

Lord Chancellor *

Lor aLough - borough *

Mani -

fold.

X, d. Lough borough.

393

A. 1781 DEBATES.

His Lordship followed up this motion with another, that the farther consideration of the bill be deferred till that day three weeks or a month. His Lordship farther declared, that he bad no wish one way or the other, unless so far as the public were likely to derive a benefit from the invention, and if after the documents which he now moved for, were produced, it should b - found that the inventor had deceived himself, he would be as sanguine as any one noble Lord, who heard him, in rejecting the whole, and in endeavouring co set aside Adr *

Philips’s pretentions.

The Marquis of Rockingham objected to the form of the Mantis of Address to the Crown. —He saw no reason, now, when the witnesses were waiting to be examined, and all the proofs before their Lordships to poftpone the business any longer. A few days iince such a motion might have been proper, it would have saved their Lordships a great deal of time and ufe - lefs attendance, but when the merits of the bill, were at issue, in his apprehension, the motion was premature.

He could fee no ground for making his Majesty a party in the business. It was unneceflary, if not disrespectful.

Befides, he was astonished to hear the noble Earl doubt, - for the first time, of the efficacy of the powder, after he had af - ferted in his place, that - he had already purchased from the inventor no lefs than one hundred ton of it for the ufe of the navy

His Lordship concluded, with assuring his Lordship that he should oppofe the motion, but he prefumed, the noble Earl relied for the success of the first merely on the merit of the second, that of poftponfng the farther consideration of the bill till the next fession of Parliament.

Earl Ferrers prefied for the immediate examination of the TLvlFerren witnesses.

The question being put upon Lord Sandwich’s motion, " the House divided. Contents _ 21 j not contents 13.

His Lordship next moved, his other motion, and changed it for that day three weeks.

Lord Abingdon addressed their Lordships in the following ^ words : Conceiving the bill that is now before us, to be

in this hour of much - wanted reformation one of the great dejiderata of the state, lam come down, suppofing it to meet my idea, to give it my most hearty support.

46 The bill, my Lords, I conceive to be a bill stating the invention of a powder for the destroyirig of vermin; and my idea is, that these vermin, are the vermin of the Court; that is to say, the vermin chat have beenever since thecommence - Vol. I. E ee ment

394

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

ment of the American war, fucking the blood and preying upon the vitals of this nation; such as contractors under ( in the true Linean system ) all their different daffcs, genera, and species, jobbers, place - mongers, bank - note, or ready - money parliamentary men, loanifts, or otherwise called ferip - men, with all the other various variety, which, from the want of acquaintance with the natural hiftory of this creation I am unable to name.

“ I say then, my Lords, if this be the object of this bill, I hope your Lordships will think that I shall be most sincere in my support of it, nor can I suppose that there is a ( ingle Lord in this House, who will not lend me his aid upon this occasion $ especially, when your Lordships consider that, in this case, it is with the body politic, exaCHy the fame as it is with the body natural : the more beggarly a beggar is, the greater number of vermin he has always about him; and just so it is with the ( fate at present, the more it is impoverished, the more it is funk, the more beggarly it is, ( thanks be to the Minister ) the more is it to oe surrounded with, the more do they cling about it; the fader do they ( tick upon it, and the more is it to be eaten up alive, and devoured byjthefe vermin.

“ But now, my Lord - ', having said this, i am afraid I Have been forming an expectation of this. bill, which is not at the bottom of it 5 but on the contrary, that instead of intending to destroy jobbers, this bill is the mod arrant job of itfelf in the world, and not only so, but the most ihameful imposition that ever was attempted to be put upon the legifla - tureof this or any other country; so shameful, my Lords, that X can consider it in no other light, than as a trial ( by playing a mere boyish trick with us ) to fee how far, and to what length the Parliament of England will suffer itfelf to be duped and imposed upon; for, my Lords taking this bill in its true light, what is the obj, e& of it ? The objeCl of it is to destroy vermin by means of a powder that has been invented for the purpose : but how, my Lords, is this to be done ? is the powder to operate by fafeination ? Is it to act of itfelf ? is it to be its own distributor ? No, my Lords, no such thing; but how then is it to be done ? Why, my Lords, as I understand, it is, to be done in the manner in which when we were boys at school, we were taught to catch birds, ’ by putting salt upon their tails, and so putting this boyish trick upon us : as for instance, to catch a bird, you are to put salt upon its tail, and so to kill an infeCf, you are to put this powder upon it; and then, my Lords, ' you are - told with a great, deal of gravity, that, this is a secret and, that for this

fepret

A. 1781. vDEBATES.

secret, we arc to pay the sum of three thousand fix hundred pounds net money. Yes, my Lords, it is for a secret; it is the secret that has been longfince wafting and exhauftingthe treafure of this country. I am told, my Lords, ( but this is no secret, for I read it in the public papers ) that one Pinchbeck, commonly called Patent - fnuffets Pinchbeck, is to be a jobber in this job; and here lies the secret, my Lords, a secret that may lead to the discovery of a great many others, and much greater jobs and secrets than this is. —But, now, my Lords, adverting more immediately to the point before us, I will, with your Lordships permission, give the House fame information that has come to my knowledge, respecting this Philippic powder ( as it may well be called; for, in killing vermin, it creates Philippics that may beofufe in directing your Lordships judgments upon this bill, —It Teems, my Lords, that the French as well as British West - India iflands, having been of late years so much affliCted with vermin as most materially to injure their crops, very great regards were offered to any person that would undertake the cure of the evil. And this, probably, my Lords, was the motive that first set Mr, Phillips’s inventive genius to work. But, my Lords, be this as it may, Mr. Philips, in search of the reward that was held out to the public by the British West - India iflands, did think fit to make an offer of his services to the body of Wefl > India planters and merchants in the city of London; of which the consequence was, that a committee of planters and merchants were appointed to enquire into Mr. Philips ’ pretenfions as to the undertaking; and they being so appointed, and the parties met, the following was the issue of business; Mr.. Philips was asked by the committee in what manner his powder was to be used ? He answered, by strewing it over the surface of the land. He was then asked to what depth ought it to be laid upon the land ? He said, about the eight part of an inch. The next question then was, what was the price of his powder ? He answered, if much of it was wanted, the price of it was a guinea per hundred weight. In possession then of these facts, the next proceeding of the committee was, to calculate by the quantity that was wanted for an acre of land what the exppnce of the powder would be per acre; and it appeared that the quantity of powder necessary to strew over an acre of land, the eighth part of an inch deep, \yould amount in price, at a guinea per hundred weight, to three hundred and fifty guineas; a price more than fix times the value of the fee simple of an - acre of land, whilft at the fame time, the

E e e 2, ' experiment

396

P A R. L I A. M ENTART A. 1781.

experiment remained to be tried upon the neighbouring acre, equally effected with vermin; and so on from acre to acre, wherever the vermin were to be found. — - I need not, me - thinks, my Lords, tell your Lord ships what was the report of this committee to their body. It certainly was not what j this bill reports to us from the House of Commons. From j the House of Commons, Mr. Philips is sent up to us to j demmd three thousand fix hundred pounds. From the com ? j mittee of Weil - India planters and merchants, Mr. Philips j was difmifl ' ed with a flea in his ear, that he might make ufe j of his powder upon himself, and not upon them. —

I trull -, niv Lords, that we shall follow the example of the planters and rnere. hants, in preference to that of the j House of Commons, and in so doing, give Mr. Philips ano *. ! ther flea in his ear for the ufe of his powder. ' There is one thing, my Lords, I had forgot to mention. It was said i in the committee of West - India planters and merchants, that Mr. Philips’s experiments, carried into ufe, would be a good I way of paving off the national debt. Pofiibly this may the secret between the minister and Mr. Philips, for which Mr. Philips is to he rewarded. If so, my Lords, I beg pardon for having troubled your Lordships, and 1 recant what j have said.

The House then went into a committee on the Bengal Judicature bill \ and alter altering some, and totally omitting others, the Lord Chancellor moved that the House be resumed, the chairman ordered to report progrefs, and the committee to proceed the next day.

1 J"iy Ft. ' -

. This day previous to the House being made, a long con - verfation took place between the two law Lords present [ the Lord Chancellor and Lord Loughborough ] - and some others, supposed to be intereflcd in the question Which was expected to come on.

At half after four o ’ clock, the order of the day was read, for the House to go into a committee on the ' Bengal Judicature bill, on which Lord Sandys took the chair of the com - ? mittee.

tro wan - One or two clauses of the bill haying been read, the Lord aiicT. Chancellor role and made a moll able and learned speech. He observed, that the bill came from the other House in a particular form, and so framed, that he was sorry he could not agree with it, though he iincerely believed it was well ip - tended,

F The

397

A 1781. DEBATES.

The clauses or provisions which he should move to leave out might be deemed by some persons the most relative and essential in promoting the intended effe£l, and obtaining the obje£ls of the law. It might possibly be urged, that he did not combat the principle of the bill, though he objefled to some of the provisions; consequently, that not with {landing any objection he might now make. He totally approved of the principle. This point was what in his opinion called upon him fora particular and prccifc explanation; and this, according to his apprehension, could not be done without having reference to the law passed the 13th of his present Majesty, which. had, in fa£l, given birth to the bill now before their Lordships.

Let us fee, said his Lordship, what was the evil complained of at that time ? and what was the - remedy applied. The principal evil was, that the company’s servants, and others, deriving rights, powers, and authorities under the Company, had been guilty of very great enormities and of - preflions, as well over his Majesty’s new as his native subjects. There was scarcely any species of oppression, or public or private malversation, which had not been committed under tliofe powers; and there can be little doubt but those complaints, numerous as they Were, and aggravated in some instances as they mull have been, had much, I fear greatly too much foundation in truth. The re ' afon which, gave rife to the interference of the English legislature, however disagreeable that interference on some accounts might be, was this; that the v, ery pprfons, their dependents, or those whom they had an interest in prote£ling, or thought fit to protect, who were authors of those opprelfions, were the very people who, under the former constitution, were invested with the power of hearing, and ultimately giving judgment, or administering redrefs to the injured party or parties.

In framing the former law, two principle objects presented themselves to the British legislature. The first to prote£fc the British native subjects resident on the spot from the perfection of their Superiors, or those acting immediately under the authority of the ' Company; the other, to shield the poor nativesj Grangers alike to our laws, religion, civil polity, and constitution, from the injuries and wrongs they were liable daily to Suffer, either from the government there, the persons employed by them, or individuals. There was besides, another; original defeat in ' the chartered constitution; which that there being no Superior court in the coun -

3

39®

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

try, deriving its powers immediately from the Crown, if any aft of rapine, oppression, or any other species of injustic was committed, there was not even a possibility of obtaining redrefs or fattsfaftion for the injured, fb long as the wrong doer chose to remain in the country. It was true, that as soon the injurer and injured came home, the latter had the law open to him; but whether in India or England, all redrefes was precluded till the wrong - doer returned to this country. This impediment flood equally in the way of the native Hindoo and the British subject.

To remedy the evil here described, it was thought proper to create a jurisdiction in the court of King’s - bench, for the purpose of opening the door to justice; thax is to say, if any injury had been committed in India, to give the new court of judicature, created or established by the fame aft in Bengal or Calcutta, a power of taking cognizance of said offence, whether the parties were in Britain or India; and if any of the material witnesses or parties happened to, be in England, in that case, to impower the court of King’s - bench hereto take dcpolitions, &c, from the persons concerned, and that the fame might be transmitted to the Supreme court at Bengal, in order to enable that court to give final judgment.

This, I take it, was one of the main objects of the bill, whether applied to the feycral descriptions I have alluded to, or the specific powers ^ authorities, jurisdictions, and persons I have pointed out.

It will not be improper, I prefume, to remind your Lord ships once more, that the evils were two - fold, as was like - wife the remedy; for if your Lordships will only attend, whether one or both the parties were absent from India, the person injured had it in his power to obtain redrefs; and in the other inllance, so far as the law respected the native ef Bengal, though his dppreflor was in England, by appealing from the place of his residence, the proceedings arising from the new legal power veiled in the court of King’s - bench, by procefs in that court here, and transmitted to the Supreme court in Bengal, there was no let or hindrance whatever to the effectual and full distribution of justice.

Upon this clear and equitable intention, the law of the 13th of his present Majesty, for the better government of the territories of the East India Company was ] pafted, and a Supreme court of criminal, as well as civil judicature, erected in that country, at leaft so far as the fame could be confirmed to be applicable to particular purposes 5 the supposedl improper

39$

A. 1781. D E B A T E b.

proper exercise of which judicature is the ground of the present bill.

Your Lorclships may wish to know perhaps, before I proceed farther, why I mould endeavour to throw any impediments in the way of the passing of the present bill, after I have declared my opinion, that the evils complained of, call strongly for a remedial law to remove or correct them. It is sufficient for me to say, before I proceed farther in aligning my reasonss, why I think a remedy is wanting; that j likewise am perfuaded that, considering the vail importance of the bill, the probable Hate of that country while I am speaking, the necellity there exists for doing something, and the infinite danger or probable mischiefs there may arise from doing too much; it would be equally imprudent and impolitic to pass the bill in the lhape it came to us from the other House, as it would be to totally rejcft it. And here, if your Lordships will give me leave, I will endeavour to elucidate more fully what I mean.

The dclign of the law of the 13th of his present Majesty, never did or could mean, because it would be prepofterous fotodo, to create a general, indiscriminate, unqualified jurisdiftion over the people; nay, over even the governmental power of the country, the supreme council and governor general. The laws of this country were intended only to af - fest the British or natural born British subjects, and to pro - left the Indians or natives from all fort of injury. It was never in the contemplation of the British legislature to compel the natives to be bound by our municipal laws relative to property; their manners, habits, religion, in short everyone circumstance which related to them as men or citizens, loudly and peremptorily forbid it. It was conlequently truly prepofterous and absurd to impole upon the natives such laws, as in many instances they could not obey, in more they could not comprehend, and which, however wife or just in themselves, they must deleft, as originating in a spirit of perfecution, and founded in the highest injustice.

In another point of view, the disagreement between the governor and council and the supreme court I look upon to be a particular misfortune. I am not now deciding, which was originally in the wrong, or whether both of them may not have been so. It is enough for me, that either they acted agreeably to the powers veiled in them, or flretehed the powers they were veiled with, in order to prevent what they might have deemed a greater evil. In either event, I am

not

400

Earl of jShizgdzit.

. PARLIAMENTA R Y A, 1781.

not prepared to go the whole length the bill propofes. It is poflible, that the powers proposed by this bill, to be veiled in the governor general may hereafter become necessary.

It is not improbable, but the jurisdiction of the lupreme court will be limited in some inflances, and require to be enlarged in others; but, besides the want of evidence on both tides, as I observed before, at so late a stage of the fession, and consequently with so {lender an attendance, I cannot say that I can, consistent with my duty, agree to the bill, unless the clauses I have already pointed out are omitted.

It may be said, and perhaps with great justice, that ( ome - : thing ought to be done. I am ready to grant, that the evil, I whether of a greater or lefs magnitude, ought to be torrefied, and that measures, such as may promile to quiet the minds of the complainants and injured, should. be adopted. To effect that pur pole I am ready to go as far as any man ought to wish to do, but no farther. Pwould recommend to have. this business taken up the next fession, and fully and gravely dif - cufled. At present, after the clauses proposed by me to be ilruck out are omittted, there will be enough of the bill left remaining to answer all the purposes of a temporary suspen - iion of the evils complained of The Governor at one fide will have it in his power to effectually discharge all the duties of his high station; the Judges will be reinflated, pro tempore in the exerciseof every part but what is deemed the opprelixve powers of their jurisdiction; and your Lordships will come fully prepared to consider a queflion, which in every point it can be viewed, seems to be worthy of your most serious consideration.

His Lordship then offered several amendments to be inserted, inflead of the clauses omitted for putting a flop, or rendering of none effeii, all prosecutions of the nature therein described, which have been, or may hereafter be instituted in the Supreme Court of Bengal, from the year 1780, and until the conclusion of the next fession of - Parliament.

The bill being gone through, the ammendments were ordered to be reported. Adjourned.

July 12.

Previous to moving the order of the day, for the second reading of the new inarriage - bill, commonly called Mr. Fox’s Marriage Bill, the Earl of Abingdon addressed the House to the following effect :

Mi

4oi

A. 1781.

D E ’ B A T E S.

My Lords, although I rife to gi ve my countenance and support to this bill, ifris not because it is such a bill as either meets iny opprobation, or obtains my wifhes; and, my Lords, for this reason : That when any measure is in itfelf wrong, noi

modification of that measure can make it right : it is the removal of the measure itfelf only that can cure the evil. Upon this principle then, my Lords, and inafmuch as this bill is intended to make that which is very bad a little better; so upon this principle, this bill cannot meet either my approbation or wifhes. Instead of a modification of the marriage aft, if it had been a bill of repeal in toto, in that case my approbation and wifhes, like the measure itfelf, had been compleat; but as this is not the case, we rauft take the good and leave the bad; we must look to the light, and shut our eyes against the dark parts of this bill; and if a man; and a woman, though called up by nature, that is, i£ habilcs ad matrimonium cannot propagate their species ( because forbidden by a pofitive law ) at fourteen or twelve years of age, it is better that they should do so at eighteen and fifteen, than be prevented from coming together, till they are twenty - one. It is in this light I look upon the bill; and it is upon this ground, my Lords, that I support it.

But now, my Lords, I have said this, I know I am calling down the aristocratic indignation of some in this House upon me : but this, my Lords, is by no means any matter, of diimay tome. As ' a rule of legislation it is laid ' down, “that therd are two interests; the interest of the : whole, and the interest of the particular : that the interest of the former is great and noble, but that the interest of the latter is mean and scandalous. ” It is by this legislative rule that my legislative : conduct will, I trust, ever be guided. It is by this rule that it is guided upon the present occasion, and perhaps there. is no occasion that can occur which more peremptorily calls for the exercise of this rule than the present. The aft which, this bill means to modify, the Marriage Act, as it : is called, was ( as my Lords the Bishops know ) like Doftor Graham’s celestial bed, made for the few, and not for the many; for us, my Lords, and not for the benefit of the nation; and therefore, as a legifiator, wherever I met with this principle, although numbered among the few myfelf, my preference will always be given to the many; for the interest. of the whole is great and noble, whilft the interest of the particular is mean and scandalous. And now, my Lords, with respect to the doctrine upon

Fff

the

402

PARLIAMENTARY A. vjtu

the aft itfelf, to which this bill alludes, although of no very long date, its demerits have been lb often discussed, as welf on its own account, as on the account of its ill - begotten child the Royal Marriage Act, and are so pointedly marked out by your Lordships protests on the journals of the House, as renders any observations of mine now, and to this end, ufelefs and unnecessary. That the aft is contrary to the laws of natufe, that it is contrary to religion, that it is contrary to the policy of all governments whatsoever, are such self - evident proportions as require no argument to prove them. To say, that when the fruit is ripe it Shall not drop, is vainly to kick againSt the pricks. Nature will be obeyed, and not even a Spanish padlock can counteract her dictates. J ^ aturam expdlas furca tamen ttfquc rtcurret• That it is contrary to religion, I appeal to the right reverend Prelates upon the bench, and - infomuch can have no doubt of their giving their support to this bill. St. Paul tells us 6i it is better to marry than to burn ., > If therefore a woman, by the laws of nature, burn at Sixteen years of age, and an aft of Parliament fays, Ihe fhairnot marry till She is twenty - one, what is the consequence ? She either breaks a com - ' mandment, and lins; or perhaps by waiting burns out the oil of her lamp, and so dies without fulfilling the end of her creation. Under these circumstances then it is not impofli - ble not to suppose, but that the right reverend prelates will lend their afhftance to a bill, which is intended, in conformity with their duty, ec Concuhitu prohihere yago” TnStead of supporting an aft which manifeftly encourages and promotes fornication and whoredom in the State.

That this aft is contrary to the policy of all governments whatsoever, the proofs are endless and without number. The wealth and Strength of a nation are its numbers; to obtain those numbers is not by loofe and intemperate pleiafures, but by the chafle and more rational medium of the marriage bed; to which the sexes are to be invited by privileges and exemptions, and not deterred by the disabilities and penalties of laws. That it is contrary to the policy of this country in particular is, above all others, true. A country, ' where freedom is said to reside, where population is to Supply the want of territory, and where trade and commerce, the creators of the other two, form the only basis of its political greatnefs. Where, inStcacl of an act like this, an aft, compelling Englishmen to fly to Scotland, to comply with the laws of nature, ( the only neceffity that could induce an

• - Englishmen

. A. 17&I. DEBATES -

4 Englishmen to fly to Scotland ) should expect to find their surest refuge, and their best supporr. Where, in - fbead of prohibitions, encouragements to population and incitements to marriage, should be the Arft objects of its laws; where, instead of such an act as this is, one should rather hope to fee a law, which whilft it impofes the payment of triple taxes upon the man who beyond a certain, age ( suppose the age of thirty ) lives a Angle and unmarried life, to the man who is married, holds out the Roman privilege, the Roman right, the jus trium liberorum, in exemption from the payment of all taxes whatever. But to do this, my Lords, we muffc have what is difficult to procure, we muff have a statesman and a politician, and not as the Earl of Chatham once said of his brother - inrlaw, Mr. Grenville, A thumper of law - books, and a retailer ofv words. ” We tnuft have an Earl of Chatham, if an Earl of Chatham can be found; and if not, we mufl take the man who has wisdom enough to let the example of that great man be the ob - je£t of his imitation. But, my Lords, 1 am running into observations, which I have already said, wpre unnecessary for me to make; and therefore I wiiL only trouble your ' Lordships with a Angle remark more, that is rather incidental to this subject from what I have last said, than a topic of argument in it, and it is this : That impolitic and unwife as

this. aft is, I mean the Marriage Act, ( for this, I prefume, no one will venture to deny, especially after the recent in - stances that have been afforded your Lordships of its want both of policy and wifdom ) it is yet the legitimate offspring of the Arft and greatest lawyer this kingdom ever had to boast of; a reflexion, my Lords, that would be disgraceful to human nature, if another reAe&ion, supported not only by the authority of the Earl of Chatham but by reason and experience, did not conArm the truth of it, and which is this : That of all descriptions of men, ( except the clergy,

who think of nothing but of their own power, ) the lawyers ( I mean mere lawyers by profeAion ) are the leaft qualicted for statesmen and politicians. Your Lordships will think this a bold assertion; but it is not therefore lefs founded on reason and experience : upon reason, for this arises out of the very nature of their profession; a profeAion that forces their abilities, however great, into all the little, low, narrow, conflned personalities of persons and minutiae of things; and in order to manage this with dexterity and success, into that poor left - handed wifdom called artiflee and cunning, into

F f f 2 those

404

PARLIAMENTARY. A > 1781.

those quirks and quibbles, which, instead of expanding, leffen and contrail the Human mind. Upon experience, for m the biographical hiftory of all our eminent lawyers ( except Bacon and Somers ) mew me a lawyer that deserves the name of a statesman; upon experience, for look to the present reign; a reign which, for the whole of it, has the eminent misfortune of being under the guidance of an eminent lawyer : a lawyer who carried us across the Rubicon, who told us to draw our swords and throw away our scab - bards; who bid us kill the Americans, or the Americans would kill us; who has made us believe that every common soldier in England, for the purposes of suppressing riots, is a justice of peace.

My Lords, upon the event ' of these counsels and upon the policy of these measures, let your Lordships experience determine. My Lords, I have done, except to add my re - solution to support this Bill; and to say, from the the counsel of such lawyers, - if his majesty will not, may the Lord deliver us ! One thing more it may be necessary for me to lay, and that is, that I have no apology to make for what I have said. Tofpcak the truth is the privilege of an En - glifhman; and to do so roundly and plainly is his first and best, and greatest glory ! lord Chan - The Lord Chancellor observed, though their Lordships ' had not regularly gone into the order of the day, the noble Earl, who took the opportunity of addressing the House, spoke to the question just as if it had been under conhderation; but, in his conception, the noble Lord had been premature in his observations, as they teemed much better. calculated for a committee, than when the principle of the bill was to be debated on a second reading.

For his own part, he had long made up his mind, but if he had not, the very late period the bill was introduced into that House, would serve him instead of every objection. Indeed the noble Lord himself disapproved of the bill in its present form, nor did he expert to hear a single noble Lord present say, that he could with propriety give his assent to the bill, destitute as it was of that degree of specification, accuracy, and precision, so necessary to bills of ' such extent - and importance, and which of course, must embrace so great a variety of objeCts.

The noble Earl had suggested several objections against the Marriage - aCI, passed in the reign of the late king, of which the present bill was designed to be a partial repeal. He could

not

A. 1781. DEBATES. ’ 4

not say that he was prepared, to enter into the subject at large, nor would it be then at all proper.

He allured their Lordships, that he heard with great indifference the general censure thrown upon the profession of the law and its profefl ' ors, nor did the memory of the great lawyer, whose character had been particularly pointed at, require him to Hand forth as an advocate to defend it. That great lawyer’s character was such as to bid defiance tojthe attacks of faction, and rofe superior to the envy or ill - will of all those who would depreciate it.

Though it might be irregular, he could not help observing, as he was up, that it was very extraordinary indeed, that the present bill, ' loofe and inaccurate as it was, was totally destitute of any plan or principal for effecting the obvious or declared purposes for which it was framed; for it did not even pretend to attempt to remedy any one of the grievances complained of as arising from the marriage aft of the late king; on the contrary, the bill proceeded upon a system perfectly new and unprecedented, and in his opinion, would leave the law worfe than it found it, in the apprehension of those, who entertained the mofl unfavourable sentiments of the aft as it now flood.

On the whole, he thought it would be extremely improper for the House, to proceed farther in a bill ' of such infinite ial - portance at so late ? a period of the session.

A motion was then made, that said bill be read a second time, and on the question put, the Earl of jflbingdon said Earl of the contents have it, ” but observing, that almost everysttingdon. Lord present was preparing to go below the bar, his Lordship declined, a division. —The House adjourned to the next day.

;,, Jub i3 -

The other orders of the day being disposed of, it was moved, that the House do resolve itfelf into a Committee on the Insolvent Debtor’s Bill, which called up Earl Poalett - ^ x p&VJn who addressed the House, to the following effect : let,

^ w

My Lords,

Tho ’ I amnotaverfe to bills of this kind passing at proper times and under proper regulations, yet I have strong objections to such frequent repetitions of them; because they have a tendency to fap and destroy all trufl, faith, and confidence between man and man, without which, it is impossible to carry trade to that extent which in a great commercial country, like this, is to be wished. Credit has hitherto run from

fix

4 « 6

PARLIAMENTARY A. 1781.

fix to eighteen months, according to different commodities, in which respective individuals generally traffic, and a vaft advantage and encouragement it is to commerce to have such long credit, but if bills of this fort recur so frequently, where is the manufacturer, who will in future give that long credit, when before the expiration of the time an insolvent bill is almost sure to pass, which absolves the person so ' intruded from the payment of all his debts ? Trade suffers a paralitic stroke by such bills : my Lords, the bill in its preamble pleads humanity and compassion to induce your Lordships to pass it, words calculated to operate on weak minds, and to assist the sinister purposes of hypocritical ones; but the confe - quences, give me leave to observe, are totally repugnant to justice, to the law of the land, and all found policy. When laws, my Lords, lofe their permanency, the people by degrees soon lofe their honesty, which earlier or later niuft bring certain ruin on any country. Nine parts in ten I will venture to affirm of those now incarcerated in the several jails throughout the kingdom have been brought there by their own idlenefs, by their own dissipation, by gambling and a total corruption of morals, many of them swindlers, many who have fraudulently got themselves put into jail merely to cheat their creditors, by taking advantage of this a£h Ought not then persons under this description to suffer a reasonable time of imprisonment at leaft, not only as a punishment for the injury they have done to individuals, but to deter others following the like examples. Away then with the cant terms of humanity and compassion, as if as much and more compassion was not due to the honest creditor who earns his bread by the callous hand of labour, as to the profligate debtor who has robbed him of his all by imposing under false pretences on his tooeafy credulity. The money which the honest creditor has thus loft, would in his hands, probably, if he had not been deluded of it, have been employed to the advantage of the public, whereas it has been Squandered by the other to the injury and disgrace of society, and what is still worfe and much to be lamented, the unhappy creditor and his whole family in consequence, shall perhaps be forced into that jail from which his profligate creditor is just freed by this bill. But farther, this bill is the greatest discouragement to trade and induftry that is possible; for what inducement has any person to be industrious but to make a favingfor himself and family ? But where is that inducement if he can find no security for the fruits of his labour ? Add to this that it is

. multiplying

407

A. 1781. DEBATES.

multiplying oaths; it is ' laying people under the strongeft temptations to perjure themselves : It is in Tome degree making yourselves accessary to fraud. Your Lordships had much better pass a short bill, and decree at once, that no person in future shall be liable to the payment of his debts. Every body will then know what he has to depend upon j what he has to trust to What has any person not over honest now to do to grow rich, but to extend his credit to the utmost, veiling whatever sum he can borrow in Bank bills, or East - India bonds, and at a proper time, by a friendly suit, get himself put into jail, out of which a bill of this kind ihortly delivers him, when he may safely laugh at his creditors, having in his own hands the only means of being detected in his fraud ? In a word, the duration of confinement is at present so short that people dofiot regard it, and are become so abandoned, in principle, that they make a trade - of taking every advantage of the credulous. Then we complain of the jails being so crouded that there is no room to contain the prisoners; to what is this owing, but to these bills of insolvency, which every three years they are taught to expect, and are hardy enough a little before the time to solicit imprisonment of some friend, with a view of leaving their creditors in the lurch ? The numbers now in prison, I understand, is the chief reason of this bill - being set on foot : if so, I most heartily commiserate the pitiful state of this country, which has not more spirit than to suffer itfelf to be overborne by the very dregs, the scum of mankind. Ifit was possible to distinguish such as are or may be truly objeCts of compassion, who by a train of real and unavoidable misfortunes have loft their liberty, and such who by a bad course of life, and with bad views, have thrown and brought themselves into prison, one should gladly pass such a bill; but as that is impossible, the"only thing which can be done in their favour is to reducetheir state of confinement to as ihort a time as you can without injury to the public, and that, I apprehend, cannot be for a lefs time than three years; a term, which few debtors would probably chuse to undergo durance of, merely with a view of cheating their creditors. My Lords, bills of this kind formerly were not used to pass but in the beginning of a reign, or once, perhaps, in seven years. Lately they have been reduced to ' three years; and I doubt not but that in a little time they will be brought regularly into Parliament annually, like the indemnification - bill, when there will be no longer any credit left in the nation. However, as this bill has already made its progrefs through the other House, and expectations of its passing have been held out to the debtors I shall not

oppofe

40®

Lord Chen cellar.

PARLIAMENTARY A. 2781

oppofe its going into a committee, in hopes it may receive some amendments, which may render it lefs liable to objections than it is at present.

The House accordingly resolved itfelf into a Committee, Lord Walfingham in the chair.

The Lord Chancellor observed, that the ground of the bill, if he understood the preamble, stated the reasons for passing such a bill in the usual and ordinary way, which he confelTed appeared to him a little extraordinary, as there had been a bill of a similar nature, passed about eighteen months since. By. the various laws in being, the creditor was assured of a security, for the property he parted with. He appealed therefore to their Lordships wifdom and justice, whether it would be consonant to either to take away that security from them f If the legislature had determined to repeal those temporary acts of insolvency at lhorter or longer periods, it would make every debtor a freeman on the cellion of his property, for the benefit of his creditors, and in order to guard such. a law from fraud. and imposition,, to veil a power in the Judges, to determine how far the debtor was or was not intitled to the benefit of the law.

He had heard that there were strong motives for passing the present bill, on which the bill was silent. —What he alluded to was the riots, which happened the preceding year, by which means an infinite number of persons, of almoll : every description of the lower order had been let loofe on the public. —For his part, he could not perceive any necelfity, which arose from that circumstance; in his opinion, thepre - fenc necelfity, rather arose from the act haftily passed at the conclusion of that session, but leaft he should not be able to make himself sufficiently understood, he would advert to some of the circumstances which came, before the courts of law, and if his memory should so far fail him, as that he should fall into any error or mistake, he trusted, he should be corrected by the two noble Lords who prelide in the Court of King’s Bench and Common Pleas, and were now present.

His Lordship then went into a hiftory of the parliamentary proceedings in consequence of the riots, continuing them down to the present moment, and taking a particular view of the two bills that had been brought in respecting prisoners at large in Middlesex and Surrey, IherifFs, jailors, &c. by the attorney - general; the one at the end of the last sessions, the other at the beginning of this. The fir# of these bills, he stated, to be the fort of remedy that in the moment, immediately subsequent to the breaking of the prisons, presented

a law

A. ifSu D E B A. T E S.

rtfelf to the minds of those under whose direction the bill was. drawn. The novelty of the occasion, and the hurry, in Which, from the nature of the neceffity that called for such a law, the bill was obliged to be drawn, might be certainly taken as the reasons why an overfight should have crept into the bill; the overfight he alluded to, was the enacting, that : not only all persons who were in actual custody, at the time of the breaking of the prisons, should, upon surrendering to the marihal or warden of the two great prisons, in which re - speflively they might have been held, be deemed, to be as if they were prisoners, but - also that all debtors who should afterwards be arrested, should,. upon fu. rrender of bail, b. e, granted a certificate, which should exempt them, and faye them barmlefs not only from their creditors, up to the mo -; ment of their being fur rendered, but also froip all the creditors. they might afterwards run in debt with. Jt was that latitude for fraud and villainy that he considered astjjeonly ground, upon which it could be pretended even that the present bill, was necessary. Nor was the overfight confined solely tp the first bill, it was to be found also in the second, whence every map, fraudulent enough to wish to take advantage of the of -, portunity afforded by the bill, was invited to pradtjjqp fraud, cheat the honest trader ^ and swell the number. of prifppers. upon the books of the King’s Bench and Fleet prisons jto the enormous size which it had already attained. Had a clause ^ enacting that all those persons who were not in custody at. the time of the breaking of the prifops,. but who were arr. efted ! since, should be put into the real /ituation of a prisoner, been, liable to - be served with declarations ? the actions against. them rendered fuperfedeable under certain circumstances,. every part of the regular procefs that went on against pri -. fpners, when in custody, to go against them, and that they, should be liable also to arrests on new suits, in his mind, all the mischiefs ' that, had happened, would have have been; avoided *

His Lordship said, in the second bill, ( that brought in thiis fefiions} there was an infirm clause, but a clause of considerable operation, which in some degree tended to correct the overfight he had complained of; and that was, the clause enadting that prisoners should not be moved from the country, by Habeas - corpus to London, to take the benefit of the former aft. His Lordship here went into a difcufiion of the ' original intention of the issuing a writ of Habeas - corpus, add said all their l ^ ordships, he doubted not. would be acto - Vou I. ' Ggg ' niflied

£ A R L I AM ENTARY A. 178 *

nished to find, ( that notwithstanding the charm the mere words Habeas - corpus carried with them, ) this writ, To far from being intended, ' as it was generally undorstood to be, ( and as by fictitious proccls it was rendered ) a benefit to the defendant, was designed to be an advantage and lbcurity to the plaintiff, who was by statute entitled to file out a writ of Habeas - corpus, in order to bring up his debtor when he endeavoured to avoid the issue ot a proccfs. At present such xvas the perverfion of practice, that defendants procured a friend to become a fictitious plaintiff, in order to sue out the writ of Habeas - corpus, and to enable them to move themselves where they pleated.

After Hating this very fully, his Lordship said, as the preamble held out none of those reasons for passing such a bill, to which he had alluded, he must speak to it as an ordinary temporary bill of infblvency, to which, and to all such, lie was eagerly anxious to be underftoocl as a profefled enemy, excepting only in cases where the public might be, pre - % ' ented from lofing the benefit of the labour of so large a number of persons, when it could be proved, that they were really unfortunate and honest, desiring to do what was right. if they had it in their power, and anxious by the sweat of their brow, to do their creditors ample, justice. To relieve such persons under certain, regulations and restrictions, he Xhould not object; but to temporary acts of insolvency in general ise always should objeCl, because he was perfuaded they were of the most pernicious consequence, and tended; rather to encourage fraud than relieve distress. lnstead of the present bill being, applicable to the case which was rumoured to be the cause of the bill, and which he understood was the form of the bill when first brought into the other House, it was, as it now Hood, an ordinary bill of insolvency, and that of the largeft fort of any \o be found upon the statute books. But it was said without doors, the extreme number of the prisoners made it necessary. Would their Lordships, owning such a neceflity, pass a temporary bill of insolvency } If they did, the inevitable consequence would be, that the evil now attempted to be cured, would grow into existence again almost immediately after the present was passed; for if the ! eg : stature once acknowledged that a large number of pri - fbners was a sufficient ground of neceflity to - render an aft of insolvency expedient, hew prisoners would croud into the priions the instant the present bill was passed, in order to create a necelfity for their being white - washed, as was called *

, A‘ 781.

D E BATES.

But there ' w « ls, ' ir. fa£l and in truth, nothing tremendous in tfre number of 6000 prisoners.

Lord Mansfield laid, the arguments that their Lordships liad just heard were lb founded in principles of ftrifl justice ^ and found policy, that he was very far from riling with an intention to conti overt them; the only way in which they could be answered was, by oppofing to them a miftaken companion, which had of late years got /fuch poffcliion of the minds of men, that the edge of the law was frequently turned against the honest and deserving creditor, in order to protect and advantage the fraudulent debtor. With regard to the general reasoning of the learned lord respefling temporary oills of Insolvency, itmuft be admitted to be perfectly just and undeniably true the mifctiiefs resulting from them were juftly encreasing, and ihc impolicy as well as the injustice of passing such bills at fho ' t intervals was so apparent, that it was wonderful the bulk of mankind had folonglhut their eyes to it. In respect to all the noble and learned Lord had said, by Way of general seasoning against such bills, his opinion exactly coincided; it had ever led that way, but the torrent was against it, and it was impossible for rhofc, whefe minds were under the bias, that he scrupled not to confess his had been to do more than veferve their fentimeats to themselves, and be silent. That the compallion, upon which the friends of such bills as the present had proceeded, was founded in error, was ealy to be ascertained by an examination of its fruits. Every aft of insolvency, and the variety of bankrupt laws now in existence had proceeded from, that miftaken compallion; and it was notorious that there was not a single statute out of aH those to which he had referred, that had not been gjrossly abuled, and which, instead - of producing good, had not produced a considerable deal of fraud and villainy, The bankrupt laws were, as every body knew, grossly perverted; and instead of serving as a securicy - to the creditor, and a check upon the debtor, operated di - reftly the contrary way. An aft of bankruptcy was regarded by the legislature as a crime,. and a commiinon was de - iigned as a puoishment; at present the reverie was the case; a commission made a bankrupt’s fortune; it was what he wilhed for; and his friends allifted him in procuring it. Eve -, ry day ’ proved the increase of ' frauds under the bankrupt laws, because ' every day shewed that they were more and more abused; and vet, he knew not hew the ubufe could be

G 0 0 0

412r

PARLIAMENTARY - A 1781 *

rectified, because he knew not how a rule could be laid down for separating the wheat from the chaff. ' So, in cases of in - lblvent bills, it was extremely difficult to draw them, so as to distiriguish the honest and industrious debtors, from the idle and frudulent. With regard therefore, to the general Teafoning against bills of insolvency, he joined most heartily with the noble and learned Lord; but he trusted he should be able to shew, that although bills of insolvency were generally pernicious at present, found policy dilated, that paf - iing some bill, like the bill then under consideration, would be highly expedient. The noble and‘learned Lord was a little miftaken in suppofing, that the interval between the time of passing the last bill of insolvency, and the "briaging in of that before the comtnitte, was only eighteen months, it was three years -, A bill Was intended last y ear, but tire •breaking of the prifo - ns prevented it. The period therefore, between the time of bringing in the last temporary bill of insolvency, and the time of bringing in the present, was longer than any interval of late years between the bringing in of inch bills.

When Michaelmas tertn came, the court of King’s - bench found the lift upon their Marshal ’ st books enormous; ' they found also, that the prisons were not repaired - nor ready to receive the pri Toners. They were puzzled how ton&; they did however what they could. They declared that all the debtors, who had fraudulently obtained the certificate, had become cheats to no purpose; for that a fraudulently obtained certificate would be of no avail; and the court had given the prisoners who were brought up from the country, the option of either going to New - prison, or back to the county jail whence they came. New - prison, his Lord - ihipt said, was a Sufficiently harlh place of confinement in point of accommodation, and those of the country prisoners, who did not accept of that jail, were remanded to the county jail. He added, that when the bill lately passed, was prepared, they had procured ? the claufey enacting, that no more prisoners should be removed by Habeas Corpus to be inferred. That bill was undoubtedly a necessary measure, and he could not but think, that some such bill as the present was at this fc - ime expedient.

: With so large a number of prisoners on the books, it would be. impossible for the courts to open the prisons. Leffen the number, and begin the new custodyjin a new manner. With a view to this, the court of King’s - bendi had already made

orders

4 » 3

A. 1781. DEBATES.

orders adapted to the purpose. They had in particular made an order, that the wives and children of prisoners should not go into ' the prisons to lodge; and that for this reason : when the families of poor debtors once got footing in the prisons, there was no getting them our. The prisons afforded them lodging; they found a means of deducing. profit from their iituation, and they lived better in jail than they ever had lived out of it. In order to prevent this, he had thought it right, when a debtor’s action. became fuperfedable, and he might obtain his liberty, to make him go out of prison by force; about eighty prisoners were thus forced out, and he did allure their Lordships, that in many cases, they complained that it was a grievousjnfringement of the liberty of the subject that they might not be allowed to continue in prison if they chose it. The Court had all ’ o ordered theaS, forbidding the ufe of allowing spirituous liquors in prisons, in order to prevent the prisoners from getting intoxicated, to be strictly enforced. Under thele new regulations, they hoped prisons would become lefs deferable places of habitation, and therefore it was designed, that the imprisonment should in future be more rigid; it was wished that the prisoners to go in might be as few as poilible.

His Lordship in the course of his speech laid, he had frequently met with a cruel debtor, who had used his creditor most hardly, but he had rarely ever known of a cruet creditor, un ! efs upon very great provocation indeed. He also laid some flrels on the insolvent bill’s having passed the other House unanimously.

Several amendments were nevertheless introduced into the bill, ' and the Lord Chancellor, after waiting to insert those amendments in their proper place, which were as it was reported, the cause of one hundred and eighty omissions, additions, &c. the bill was ordered to be reported, and the House adjourned to Monday the 16th.

There was no further debate, and the King coming to the House the next day, Tuesday, July 17, was pleased to give the Koyal Aflent to such bills as were ready, and to give his directions to the Lord Chancellor, to prorogue both Houses of Parliament, agreeably to the accustomed forms, in such cases made and provided.

END OF THE FOURTH VOLUME.

[ Adverts removed. ]

